Int J Mol Sci

. 2017 Oct 10;18(10):2117. doi:
[10.3390/ijms18102117](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms18102117)

  * [Search in PMC](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/search/?term=%22Int%20J%20Mol%20Sci%22%5Bjour%5D)
  * [Search in PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Int%20J%20Mol%20Sci%22%5Bjour%5D)
  * [View in NLM Catalog](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nlmcatalog?term=%22Int%20J%20Mol%20Sci%22%5BTitle%20Abbreviation%5D)
  * [Add to search](?term=%22Int%20J%20Mol%20Sci%22%5Bjour%5D)

# Dose- and Ion-Dependent Effects in the Oxidative Stress Response to Space-
Like Radiation Exposure in the Skeletal System

[Joshua S
Alwood](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Alwood%20JS%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Joshua S Alwood

1Bone and Signaling Laboratory, Space BioSciences Division, NASA Ames Research
Center, Mail-Stop 236-7, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA;
joshua.s.alwood@nasa.gov (J.S.A.); luan.h.tran@nasa.gov (L.H.T.); ann-
sofie.schreurs@nasa.gov (A.-S.S.); yasaman.shirazi-fard@nasa.gov (Y.S.-F.);
akhilesh482@gmail.com (A.K.); Hilton.Diane@att.net (D.H.);
candiceginn.t.tahimic@nasa.gov (C.G.T.T.)

Find articles by [Joshua S
Alwood](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Alwood%20JS%22%5BAuthor%5D)

1,†, [Luan H
Tran](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Tran%20LH%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Luan H Tran

1Bone and Signaling Laboratory, Space BioSciences Division, NASA Ames Research
Center, Mail-Stop 236-7, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA;
joshua.s.alwood@nasa.gov (J.S.A.); luan.h.tran@nasa.gov (L.H.T.); ann-
sofie.schreurs@nasa.gov (A.-S.S.); yasaman.shirazi-fard@nasa.gov (Y.S.-F.);
akhilesh482@gmail.com (A.K.); Hilton.Diane@att.net (D.H.);
candiceginn.t.tahimic@nasa.gov (C.G.T.T.)

Find articles by [Luan H
Tran](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Tran%20LH%22%5BAuthor%5D)

1,†, [Ann-Sofie
Schreurs](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Schreurs%20AS%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Ann-Sofie Schreurs

1Bone and Signaling Laboratory, Space BioSciences Division, NASA Ames Research
Center, Mail-Stop 236-7, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA;
joshua.s.alwood@nasa.gov (J.S.A.); luan.h.tran@nasa.gov (L.H.T.); ann-
sofie.schreurs@nasa.gov (A.-S.S.); yasaman.shirazi-fard@nasa.gov (Y.S.-F.);
akhilesh482@gmail.com (A.K.); Hilton.Diane@att.net (D.H.);
candiceginn.t.tahimic@nasa.gov (C.G.T.T.)

Find articles by [Ann-Sofie
Schreurs](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Schreurs%20AS%22%5BAuthor%5D)

1,†, [Yasaman Shirazi-Fard](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Shirazi-
Fard%20Y%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Yasaman Shirazi-Fard

1Bone and Signaling Laboratory, Space BioSciences Division, NASA Ames Research
Center, Mail-Stop 236-7, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA;
joshua.s.alwood@nasa.gov (J.S.A.); luan.h.tran@nasa.gov (L.H.T.); ann-
sofie.schreurs@nasa.gov (A.-S.S.); yasaman.shirazi-fard@nasa.gov (Y.S.-F.);
akhilesh482@gmail.com (A.K.); Hilton.Diane@att.net (D.H.);
candiceginn.t.tahimic@nasa.gov (C.G.T.T.)

Find articles by [Yasaman Shirazi-
Fard](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Shirazi-
Fard%20Y%22%5BAuthor%5D)

1, [Akhilesh
Kumar](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Kumar%20A%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Akhilesh Kumar

1Bone and Signaling Laboratory, Space BioSciences Division, NASA Ames Research
Center, Mail-Stop 236-7, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA;
joshua.s.alwood@nasa.gov (J.S.A.); luan.h.tran@nasa.gov (L.H.T.); ann-
sofie.schreurs@nasa.gov (A.-S.S.); yasaman.shirazi-fard@nasa.gov (Y.S.-F.);
akhilesh482@gmail.com (A.K.); Hilton.Diane@att.net (D.H.);
candiceginn.t.tahimic@nasa.gov (C.G.T.T.)

Find articles by [Akhilesh
Kumar](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Kumar%20A%22%5BAuthor%5D)

1, [Diane
Hilton](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Hilton%20D%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Diane Hilton

1Bone and Signaling Laboratory, Space BioSciences Division, NASA Ames Research
Center, Mail-Stop 236-7, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA;
joshua.s.alwood@nasa.gov (J.S.A.); luan.h.tran@nasa.gov (L.H.T.); ann-
sofie.schreurs@nasa.gov (A.-S.S.); yasaman.shirazi-fard@nasa.gov (Y.S.-F.);
akhilesh482@gmail.com (A.K.); Hilton.Diane@att.net (D.H.);
candiceginn.t.tahimic@nasa.gov (C.G.T.T.)

Find articles by [Diane
Hilton](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Hilton%20D%22%5BAuthor%5D)

1, [Candice G T
Tahimic](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Tahimic%20CGT%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Candice G T Tahimic

1Bone and Signaling Laboratory, Space BioSciences Division, NASA Ames Research
Center, Mail-Stop 236-7, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA;
joshua.s.alwood@nasa.gov (J.S.A.); luan.h.tran@nasa.gov (L.H.T.); ann-
sofie.schreurs@nasa.gov (A.-S.S.); yasaman.shirazi-fard@nasa.gov (Y.S.-F.);
akhilesh482@gmail.com (A.K.); Hilton.Diane@att.net (D.H.);
candiceginn.t.tahimic@nasa.gov (C.G.T.T.)

2Wyle Laboratories, Mail-Stop 236-7, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA

Find articles by [Candice G T
Tahimic](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Tahimic%20CGT%22%5BAuthor%5D)

1,2, [Ruth K
Globus](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Globus%20RK%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Ruth K Globus

1Bone and Signaling Laboratory, Space BioSciences Division, NASA Ames Research
Center, Mail-Stop 236-7, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA;
joshua.s.alwood@nasa.gov (J.S.A.); luan.h.tran@nasa.gov (L.H.T.); ann-
sofie.schreurs@nasa.gov (A.-S.S.); yasaman.shirazi-fard@nasa.gov (Y.S.-F.);
akhilesh482@gmail.com (A.K.); Hilton.Diane@att.net (D.H.);
candiceginn.t.tahimic@nasa.gov (C.G.T.T.)

Find articles by [Ruth K
Globus](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Globus%20RK%22%5BAuthor%5D)

1,*

  * Author information
  * Article notes
  * Copyright and License information

1Bone and Signaling Laboratory, Space BioSciences Division, NASA Ames Research
Center, Mail-Stop 236-7, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA;
joshua.s.alwood@nasa.gov (J.S.A.); luan.h.tran@nasa.gov (L.H.T.); ann-
sofie.schreurs@nasa.gov (A.-S.S.); yasaman.shirazi-fard@nasa.gov (Y.S.-F.);
akhilesh482@gmail.com (A.K.); Hilton.Diane@att.net (D.H.);
candiceginn.t.tahimic@nasa.gov (C.G.T.T.)

2Wyle Laboratories, Mail-Stop 236-7, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA

*

Correspondence: ruth.k.globus@nasa.gov; Tel.: +1-650-604-5247; Fax:
+1-650-604-3159

†

These authors contributed equally to this work.

Received 2017 Sep 2; Accepted 2017 Sep 30; Collection date 2017 Oct.

© 2017 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/>).

[PMC Copyright notice](/about/copyright/)

PMCID: PMC5666799 PMID: [28994728](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28994728/)

## Abstract

Space radiation may pose a risk to skeletal health during subsequent aging.
Irradiation acutely stimulates bone remodeling in mice, although the long-term
influence of space radiation on bone-forming potential (osteoblastogenesis)
and possible adaptive mechanisms are not well understood. We hypothesized that
ionizing radiation impairs osteoblastogenesis in an ion-type specific manner,
with low doses capable of modulating expression of redox-related genes.
16-weeks old, male, C57BL6/J mice were exposed to low linear-energy-transfer
(LET) protons (150 MeV/n) or high-LET 56Fe ions (600 MeV/n) using either low
(5 or 10 cGy) or high (50 or 200 cGy) doses at NASA’s Space Radiation Lab.
Five weeks or one year after irradiation, tissues were harvested and analyzed
by microcomputed tomography for cancellous microarchitecture and cortical
geometry. Marrow-derived, adherent cells were grown under osteoblastogenic
culture conditions. Cell lysates were analyzed by RT-PCR during the
proliferative or mineralizing phase of growth, and differentiation was
analyzed by imaging mineralized nodules. As expected, a high dose (200 cGy),
but not lower doses, of either 56Fe or protons caused a loss of cancellous
bone volume/total volume. Marrow cells produced mineralized nodules ex vivo
regardless of radiation type or dose; 56Fe (200 cGy) inhibited
osteoblastogenesis by more than 90% (5 weeks and 1 year post-IR). After 5
weeks, irradiation (protons or 56Fe) caused few changes in gene expression
levels during osteoblastogenesis, although a high dose 56Fe (200 cGy)
increased _Catalase_ and _Gadd45_. The addition of exogenous superoxide
dismutase (SOD) protected marrow-derived osteoprogenitors from the damaging
effects of exposure to low-LET (137Cs γ) when irradiated in vitro, but had
limited protective effects on high-LET 56Fe-exposed cells. In sum, either
protons or 56Fe at a relatively high dose (200 cGy) caused persistent bone
loss, whereas only high-LET 56Fe increased redox-related gene expression,
albeit to a limited extent, and inhibited osteoblastogenesis. Doses below 50
cGy did not elicit widespread responses in any parameter measured. We conclude
that high-LET irradiation at 200 cGy impaired osteoblastogenesis and regulated
steady-state gene expression of select redox-related genes during
osteoblastogenesis, which may contribute to persistent bone loss.

**Keywords:** cancellous bone, osteoblast, ionizing radiation, spaceflight,
oxidative stress

## 1\. Introduction

Structural degradation and oxidative stress following exposure to space
radiation potentially endangers skeletal health of astronauts, both during the
mission and later in life. Weightlessness-induced musculoskeletal atrophy,
psychological stress, and confinement pose additional risks to astronaut
health [1]. For exploration missions into deep space, galactic cosmic-rays
(GCR) are of particular concern because of the high-energy and densely
ionizing pattern of energy deposition from heavy ions [2,3,4], which can
induce oxidative stress [5,6] in various tissues. Both solar particle-
emissions (SPE) and GCR contribute to the mixed composition of low-energy
radiation (such as protons and γ rays), high linear-energy-transfer (LET)
particles (such as ionized 56Fe- and 12C-nuclei), and secondary constituents,
such as Bremmstrahlung, fragmentation products, and neutrons [4,7]. Estimates
of the total absorbed dose during a Mars mission (180-day transits with
500-day surface operations) to be between 28–47 cGy, with GCR contributing 27
cGy [8,9]. Currently, risk of exposure-induced death from a fatal cancer
drives the NASA astronaut career radiation-exposure limit [10], though NASA is
investigating additional risks associated with acute and late tissue
degeneration following radiation exposure [11].

Irradiation perturbs the redox balance within the bone and marrow compartment
in a complex and transient manner. Total-body irradiation (137Cs, 200 cGy)
induces rapid reactive oxidative species formation in the marrow [12] and
increases expression of the master transcription factor that binds to the
antioxidant response element, nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2
(_Nrf2)_ [13]. Excess reactive oxygen species (ROS) can interfere with
osteogenesis of bone marrow derived osteoprogenitors [14,15] as well as
contribute to bone resorption by osteoclasts [16]. High-LET 56Fe (≥200 cGy)
impairs cell proliferation during osteoblastogenesis from marrow progenitors
in a dose-dependent manner [17]. Further, irradiation in vitro with 56Fe (100
cGy) arrests the cell cycle and inhibits proliferation of mesenchymal stem
cells [18]. At higher doses (400–800 cGy), irradiation with X-rays increases
ROS, depletes antioxidant stores, increases Nrf2 protein levels, and reduces
differentiation in osteoblast-like cells [19]. However, the role of oxidative
stress on the potential for total-body irradiation (TBI) to impair
osteoblastogenesis over the long term, in particular low-dose, high-LET
species, has not been fully characterized.

We posed three principal questions to address in this study. First, are the
severity of acute bone loss [12,13,20,21] and impairment of osteoblastogenesis
[17] following TBI dependent on radiation type (LET) or dose? Secondly, which
pathways are activated? Finally, do irradiation-induced insults to skeletal
structure and osteoblastogenesis persist long after exposure? We hypothesized
that: (1) irradiation induces bone loss, shown previously to be dominated by
total dose of exposure [22], and leads to temporal perturbations in
antioxidant defenses; (2) TBI induces both persistent changes in redox-related
genes and cancellous microarchitecture in an ion-dependent manner; and, (3)
addition of an antioxidant, here the enzyme superoxide dismutase (SOD),
mitigates irradiation-induced damage to osteoprogenitors and stem cells when
exposed in vitro, implicating an oxidative-stress dependent mechanism.

To address these questions, we conducted in vivo and in vitro experiments. For
in vivo work, we selected protons and 56Fe ions as representative radiation
for the abundant low-LET particles in space radiation and the heavy-ion
component of galactic cosmic radiation, respectively. For in vitro work, we
selected 137Cs γ rays as a low-LET reference radiation to enable high-
throughput countermeasure testing. In vivo, there were persistent and profound
decrements in mineralized nodules after TBI (at 200 cGy) with 56Fe, while
protons had a milder effect. In contrast to our hypothesis, few changes were
observed in the steady-state expression of redox-related genes during ex vivo
osteoblastogenesis following TBI, although there was some indication of
altered expression of select genes during the proliferative phase (at 200 cGy
56Fe, but not lower doses). Furthermore, scavenging ROS with an antioxidant
(i.e., SOD) mitigated adverse effects of in vitro irradiation with γ rays, but
failed to protect fully from irradiation with an equivalent dose of heavy
ions.

## 2\. Results

### 2.1. TBI Experiment Design

To evaluate the individual effects of radiation type, our study queried a dose
response to high-LET 56Fe or low-LET protons (see Methods below for details)
at one day, seven days, or five weeks post-exposure. Additionally, we assessed
the sequelae of 56Fe irradiation at a late, 1-year post exposure endpoint
(Figure 1A,B). Tibiae and femora were collected for assessment of the
cancellous microarchitecture. Bone-marrow cells were cultured ex vivo in
osteoblastogenic media for colony counts and mineralization assays.
Additionally, the effects of total body irradiation on gene expression were
assayed at two points, during the proliferation and mineralization phase, of
osteoblastogenesis.

#### Figure 1.

[![Figure
1](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/f4d0/5666799/adf134a2a598/ijms-18-02117-g001.jpg)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=5666799_ijms-18-02117-g001.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/ijms-18-02117-f001/)

Total Body Irradiation (TBI) experiment designs. (**A**) Experiments to
determine whether TBI alters antioxidant gene expression in osteoblasts,
osteoblastogenesis, and the structure of cancellous bone in an ion-dependent
fashion at five weeks after proton or 56Fe exposure and to determine the
osteoblastogenic and structural sequelae of 56Fe irradiation one year after
exposure. At each endpoint, marrow cells were cultured for osteoblastogenesis.
At 5 weeks post-irradiation, osteoblastogenic cultures were halted during the
proliferative phase and differentiation phase for gene expression assessment;
(**B**) Experiment to determine the acute effect of proton or 56Fe irradiation
on the antioxidant status of the bone marrow extracellular fluid (ECF). Mice
were irradiated and euthanized either one or seven days after exposure. Marrow
was collected and cells removed through centrifugation. The supernatant,
defined as the extracellular fluid (ECF), was assessed for total antioxidant
capacity.

### 2.2. Body Mass Temporal Responses and Coat Color

Body mass was measured (±0.1 g), at least weekly, throughout the study as an
index of general health (Figure 2, showing the 1-year post irradiation
cohorts). As determined by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Dunnett’s
posthoc, within six days of exposure, 56Fe (200 cGy) reduced the cohort’s mean
body mass by 4% relative to the starting weights. Other doses and ions had no
significant effect relative to starting weights [23]. Shipment of the mice
from Brookhaven National Lab (BNL) to NASA Ames between days 6 and 8, caused a
5% decline in body weights of all of the groups.

#### Figure 2.

[![Figure
2](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/f4d0/5666799/ca05c1a0ca8a/ijms-18-02117-g002.jpg)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=5666799_ijms-18-02117-g002.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/ijms-18-02117-f002/)

Longitudinal body mass measurements of 56Fe-irradiated mice up to 1 year post-
exposure (mice from Figure 1A). Mice were irradiated on day 0 and shipping
took place between days 6 and 8. Data are mean ± standard deviation with _n_ =
13 per group.

Following shipment, the body mass of all groups rose over time (+7% for the
5-weeks endpoint and +46% for the 1-year endpoint), with no treatment effect,
nor interaction of time × treatment (Figure 2). By the time of euthanasia at
5-weeks or 1-year post-irradiation, body mass did not significantly differ
between irradiated and age-matched sham-controls.

Additionally, as an index of general health, the coat color was assessed as
grey or black at the end of the experiment (1-year post-irradiation). In sham
controls, 1 out of 13 mice had a grey coat (Table 1). In contrast, 56Fe (200
cGy) caused all of the 11 to have grey coats. The lower doses of 56Fe
irradiation, 10 or 50 cGy, did not modulate coat color compared to sham-
controls, respectively.

#### Table 1.

Fur coat color and cancellous microarchitecture of the proximal tibial
metaphysis 1 year after 56Fe irradiation.

Parameter | Sham | 10 cGy | 50 cGy | 200 cGy  
---|---|---|---|---  
Grey/Not Grey Coat (%) | 1/12 (7.7%) | 1/12 (7.7%) | 1/11 (8.3%) | 11/0 (100%)  
Percent Bone Volume (%) | 9.7 ± 3.1 | 8.7 ± 2.4 | 8.2 ± 2.9 | 7.2 ± 1.5  
Trabecular Thickness (μm) | 59.3 ± 5.3 | 58.2 ± 3.2 | 57.7 ± 2.9 | 57.1 ± 2.7  
Trabecular Separation (μm) | 228.8 ± 23.3 | 245.0 ± 41.8 | 240.1 ± 30.2 | 248.5 ± 18.4  
Trabecular Number (1/mm) | 1.62 ± 0.36 | 1.49 ± 0.35 | 1.42 ± 0.48 | 1.26 ± 0.23  
  
[Open in a new tab](table/ijms-18-02117-t001/)

### 2.3. Bone Structure

Microcomputed tomography was used to assess the effects of aging and
irradiation on the cancellous tissue in the proximal tibial metaphysis at the
5 week and 1 year endpoints (Figure 1A) and cortical geometry of the femoral
midshaft at the 1-year endpoint. In sham-treated animal cohorts, aging caused
a 54% reduction of cancellous bone volume/total volume (BV/TV) between the
5-week (Figure 3A, 21.1 ± 2.2%) and 1-year (Table 1, 9.7 ± 3.1%) post-
treatment endpoints.

#### Figure 3.

[![Figure
3](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/f4d0/5666799/e021d80133d8/ijms-18-02117-g003.jpg)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=5666799_ijms-18-02117-g003.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/ijms-18-02117-f003/)

Dose response of cancellous bone microarchitecture following proton or 56Fe
irradiation at 5 weeks after exposure (mice from Figure 1A). Microarchitecture
was assessed using microcomputed tomography and the parameters of (**A**) bone
volume / total volume (BV/TV, %) and (**B**) trabecular number (Tb.N, 1/mm).
Data are mean ± standard deviation, with _n_ = 8/group. * denotes _p_ ≤ 0.05
vs. age-matched sham control.

At 5 weeks post-irradiation, 50 and 200 cGy 56Fe caused a decrement in BV/TV
(Figure 3A, −16% and −31%, respectively) and strut number (Tb.N, Figure 3B,
−16% and −31%, respectively) in the cancellous region of the proximal tibia,
compared to shams. For protons, 200 cGy caused a −22% decrement in BV/TV
(Figure 3A) and Tb.N (Figure 3B), while 50 cGy showed a trend towards
decreased BV/TV (−11%, _p_ = 0.12) and Tb.N (−13%, _p_ = 0.06). Additionally,
irradiation at 200 cGy increased trabecular separation, but did not affect
trabecular thickness [23]. At 5 or 10 cGy, neither 56Fe, nor protons, showed
any detectable bone loss, by any structural measure.

At 1 year post-irradiation, 56Fe (200 cGy) showed a trend of decreased BV/TV
and Tb.N (−25%, _p_ = 0.12, Table 1) in the cancellous region of the proximal
tibia, as compared to age-matched controls. No changes were observed at 10 or
50 cGy doses when compared to controls. Additionally, no significant changes
in cortical geometry of the femur at midshaft (bone volume and cortical
thickness, [23]) were detected, as compared to age-matched controls.

### 2.4. Ex Vivo Osteoblastogenesis

To assess the cellular responses to irradiation during ex vivo osteoblast
growth and maturation, we cultured marrow progenitor cells at the 5 week and 1
year post-irradiation endpoints. For cultures plated 5 weeks post-irradiation,
gene expression, alkaline phosphatase activity, colony counts, and DNA content
analyses were performed during the proliferative phase (seven days after
plating) and mineralization phase (19 to 21 days after plating). At the end of
the latter phase, the mineralized area was quantified to assess the functional
outcome of differentiation.

During the mineralization phase, we observed well-formed nodules in the sham
and proton-irradiated (200 cGy) groups (Figure 4A,B), with sham values
displaying wide variance. In contrast, we observed very few, yet fully
mineralized, nodules in the 56Fe-irradiated (200 cGy) group (Figure 4A,B).
After quantifying the nodule area, irradiation with 56Fe (200 cGy) tended to
cause a −91% decrement (_p_ = 0.06, Figure 4A,B) in the mineralization area
(median) as compared to sham-irradiated controls. This inhibitory effect is
consistent with findings from our other experiments with this dose of 56Fe at
various times after exposure [23]. Although, mineralization area of cultures
from animals exposed to protons (200 cGy) tended to be lower than sham-
controls (−70%, _p_ = 0.10, Figure 4A,B), nodules from proton-irradiated mice
appeared larger and more widespread than in cultures from 56Fe-irradiated mice
(Figure 4B). Lower doses of either species did not affect mineralized area or
any other measured parameters [23].

#### Figure 4.

[![Figure
4](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/f4d0/5666799/61c31460b485/ijms-18-02117-g004.jpg)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=5666799_ijms-18-02117-g004.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/ijms-18-02117-f004/)

Differentiation and proliferation responses of osteoprogenitors cultured from
bone marrow of mice that received proton or 56Fe irradiation (5 weeks post-
irradiation from mice in Figure 1A). (**A**) Nodule area of cultures from
animals irradiated with 200 cGy proton or 56Fe compared to sham control. Data
are summarized by median and interquartile range with _n_ = 6–7/group. Each
dot represents an individual mouse. (**B**) Grayscale (top row) and binarized
(bottom row) images of representative wells (i.e., near the group median),
showing nodules during the mineralization phase for 200 cGy proton or iron or
sham. Gene expression assessed during (**C**) terminal differentiation or
(**D**) proliferation for markers of differentiation, damage response, cell
cycle, and redox response in cells cultured from the marrow of previously
irradiated mice. Data are mean ± standard deviation of Log2 (Fold Change)
transformed values relative to the endogenous gene _HPRT_ and normalized to
the sham control (i.e., ΔΔ _C_ t). The dashed line at 1.0 indicates the sham
control level. _n_ = 4/group, * denotes _p_ ≤ 0.05 vs. sham-control.

Radiation exposure did not modify expression levels for most of the genes
analyzed during the mineralization phase (Table 2), although a high dose of
56Fe (200 cGy) tended to decrease expression of the osteoblast differentiation
gene _Alpl_ by −60% (_p_ = 0.12), Figure 4C. Additionally, a low dose of 56Fe
(10 cGy) increased the expression of the antioxidant gene _CuZnSOD_ (+90%) as
compared to sham-controls, whereas proton exposure did not modify expression
levels for any of the genes assayed [23]. Taken together, these data suggest
mild effects late in culture, but only for 56Fe, not protons.

#### Table 2.

List of genes quantified from ex vivo culture, which did not show significant
changes in expression levels. Cells were isolated and cultured five weeks
post-irradiation and analyzed at proliferative and terminally differentiated
stages in growth.

Proliferative Stage | Terminal Differentiation  
---|---  
_Caspase 3_ | _Caspase 3_  
_Cdk2_ | _Catalase_  
_CuZnSOD_ | _Cdk2_  
_Foxo1_ | _Gadd45_  
_GPX_ | _iNos_  
_MnSOD_ | _MnSOD_  
_p21_ | _p53_  
_p53_ | _PCNA_  
_PCNA_ | -  
_Runx2_ | -  
  
[Open in a new tab](table/ijms-18-02117-t002/)

During the proliferative phase, most doses and types of radiation exposure did
not modify the expression levels for the genes analyzed when compared to sham-
controls (Table 2). A high-dose of 56Fe (200 cGy) did however increase the
expression levels of genes for the cell cycle arrest marker _Gadd45_ (+223%)
and the antioxidant _Catalase_ (+81%), and also tended to increase the late-
osteoblastic marker _Bglap_ (+196%, _p_ = 0.08) (Figure 4D). A lower dose of
56Fe (5 cGy) decreased the gene expression of the nitric oxide generator
_iNOS_ by −53% and increased Gadd45 by +91%, respectively, when compared to
sham controls.

For the ex vivo marrow culture performed 1-year post irradiation, the numbers
of colonies were counted eight days after plating and nodule areas were
assessed 28 days after plating. 56Fe irradiation (200 cGy) tended to reduce
colony counts at day eight (−45%, Figure 5A) when compared to controls,
whereas lower doses of 56Fe (10 and 50 cGy) had no effect. At 28 days after
plating, cells from 56Fe (200 cGy)-irradiated mice tended to show reduced
mineralized area (−96% reduction of median, _p_ < 0.06, Figure 5B), whereas
lower doses had no effect as compared to controls. Taken together, these data
suggest that only the highest dose of 56Fe had a persistent effect to inhibit
osteoblastogenesis, as assessed by colony formation.

#### Figure 5.

[![Figure
5](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/f4d0/5666799/9500ba6192db/ijms-18-02117-g005.jpg)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=5666799_ijms-18-02117-g005.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/ijms-18-02117-f005/)

Persistent effects of 56Fe (200 cGy) TBI on osteoblastogenesis at 1 year post-
exposure (mice from Figure 1A). Marrow was cultured in osteoblastogenic
conditions. We quantified (**A**) colony number on day 8 in vitro and (**B**)
nodule area on day 28 in vitro (with dots representing individual mice). Data
are summarized by mean and standard deviation (**A**) and median and
interquartile range (**B**), with _n_ = 5–6/group.

### 2.5. Total Antioxidant Capacity of the Marrow Extracellular Fluid

To assess the changes in the redox microenvironment in the marrow cavity
following irradiation, we measured the antioxidant capacity of the
extracellular fluid from the marrow, (normalized by protein concentration) at
one and seven days after exposure to 56Fe or protons (Figure 1B). Protons (200
cGy) or 56Fe (200 cGy) decreased the total antioxidant capacity of the marrow
extracellular fluid by over 35% within one day of exposure (Figure 6). In
contrast, seven days after exposure, protons caused a 62% elevation of
antioxidant capacity (Figure 6), whereas 56Fe did not differ from sham
controls. Lower doses of radiation (5 cGy 56Fe or 10 cGy proton), did not
modify antioxidant capacity per proton concentration with sham-controls at
either timepoint.

#### Figure 6.

[![Figure
6](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/f4d0/5666799/3ea951c6538a/ijms-18-02117-g006.jpg)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=5666799_ijms-18-02117-g006.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/ijms-18-02117-f006/)

Irradiation perturbation of the marrow oxidative milieu, assessed by the
antioxidant capacity of the extracellular fluid (ECF), in mice at one and
seven days post exposure (following timeline in Figure 1B). Mice were
irradiated with 56Fe at 5 or 200 cGy or protons at 10 or 200 cGy. Data are
mean ± standard deviation. * _p_ ≤ 0.05 versus sham control.

### 2.6. In Vitro Radiation Effects on Osteoblastogenesis

We hypothesized that a radiation-induced rise in ROS damages osteoprogenitors,
leading to a decrease in number and activity of differentiated progeny and
therefore exogenous antioxidant is expected to mitigate adverse effects of
radiation on the proliferation and subsequent differentiation of
osteoprogenitors derived from the marrow. The influence of a low-LET species
(137Cs) was compared to that of high-LET 56Fe. Adherent marrow cells grown
under osteoblastogenic culture conditions were irradiated at day 3 in culture
and the percentage change in DNA content between day 3 (day of irradiation)
and day 10 calculated as a surrogate of culture growth (proliferation).
Analysis of the dose-response to 137Cs and 56Fe revealed significant
decrements in growth after exposure to 137Cs (200 cGy and 500 cGy) or 56Fe
(100 cGy, 200 cGy), but not after exposure to lower doses (Figure 7A). Colony
counts also were affected at the higher doses of radiation [23]. In summary,
as shown in Figure 7A, osteoprogenitors appeared more sensitive to high-LET
56Fe than low-LET 137Cs γ.

#### Figure 7.

[![Figure
7](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/f4d0/5666799/c350b1d2868a/ijms-18-02117-g007.jpg)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=5666799_ijms-18-02117-g007.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/ijms-18-02117-f007/)

In vitro irradiation effects on osteoblastogenesis. (**A**) Dose response
curve of osteoprogenitor growth after exposure to radiation using low-LET
137Cs or high-LET 56Fe; (**B**) Addition of the antioxidant superoxide
dismutase (SOD) and its prevention of the irradiation-induced decrement in
cell growth. Data are shown normalized to the sham control (which is depicted
by the dashed line at 1.0), expressed as mean ± standard deviation. * denotes
_p_ ≤ 0.05 versus the sham-irradiated control.

To begin to assess the contribution of oxidative stress after in vitro
radiation exposure of osteoprogenitors, several antioxidants (including SOD
with and without polyethylene glycol (PEG); SOD with nanoparticles or
liposomes; Catalase with and without PEG) were screened by addition to the
culture media, with SOD (without carrier) showing the most promising results
[23]. Addition of exogenous SOD (200 U/mL) provided twice a day (on day 3 and
day 4) effectively protected cell growth from irradiation with 137Cs, whereas
higher doses of SOD or longer periods of treatment were less effective [23].
As shown in Figure 7B, addition of SOD prevented the inhibition of growth by
137Cs (200 cGy). In contrast, addition of SOD was not as sufficient to rescue
the cell death incurred after exposure to an equivalent dose of 56Fe (200
cGy).

## 3\. Discussion

Heavy-ion irradiation during space missions is a risk to the skeletal health
of astronauts, causing skeletal degeneration and cellular damage in
simulations with rodents [12,20,24]. In this study, we sought to elucidate the
role of radiation type and changes in the oxidative milieu of bone marrow
related to marrow-derived osteoprogenitor differentiation. We found that low
doses (below 50 cGy) of either low-LET protons or high-LET 56Fe did not cause
observable adverse effects on structure and osteoblastogenesis at any
endpoint, and, further, did not strongly perturb antioxidant capacity at seven
days of exposure (Figure 6) nor expression levels of redox-related genes
(Figure 4, Table 2) at 35 days of exposure. In contrast, only a high dose of
56Fe radiation (200 cGy) was sufficient to induce detrimental effects on total
antioxidant capacity, bone structure, and osteoprogenitor populations of the
marrow (Figure 3, Figure 4, Figure 5 and Figure 6). These changes were
associated with transient elevations in mRNA levels (Figure 4C,D) of an
antioxidant gene (_Catalase_) and a DNA-damage/cell cycle arrest marker
(_Gadd45_) during ex vivo osteoblastogenesis, which we speculate indicates
persistent oxidative stress or enhanced antioxidant defenses during the
proliferative phase. Interestingly, cultures showed a trend towards elevation
of osteocalcin (_Bglap_ , Figure 4D), a late marker of differentiation, during
the proliferative phase, which may indicate that 56Fe exposure accelerated
differentiation.

Body mass and coat color were assessed as general indices of animal health.
Body mass indicated that animals showed a modest and transient decline in
response to 56Fe irradiation with 200 cGy (Figure 2), consistent with our
previous studies [17]. Additionally, 56Fe irradiation at 200 cGy uniquely
caused a shift in coat color from black to grey (Table 1). We interpret this
as a hallmark of oxidative stress in the hair follicle [25], and, when coupled
with the osteoprogenitor effects, this may signal premature aging in a second
tissue, in line with the free-radical theory of cellular aging [26,27].

In rodents, radiation injury to bone between with 56Fe (10–200 cGy, 1 GeV/n)
[17] manifests as acute cell death of marrow cells and concomitant cancellous
bone loss driven by osteoclasts [12,22,28]. In this work, we showed that high-
dose 56Fe or proton (200 cGy) caused a transient reduction in antioxidant
capacity in the marrow microenvironment (Figure 6), potentially indicative of
a depletion of extracellular antioxidant stores with subsequent recovery of
the extracellular antioxidant defense system [29]. These findings are
consistent with our data showing the marrow cell response to increase mRNA
expression levels of the master antioxidant transcription factor, _Nrf2_ ,
shown previously [13], and with effects also evident in a cell line at even
higher doses [19]. Our group showed that a dietary supplement rich in
antioxidants and polyphenols (dried plum) prevents bone loss and _Nrf2_
induction from γ irradiation in mice [30], supportive of the role of oxidative
stress in driving acute bone loss. Additionally, in vitro, 200 cGy 56Fe
impairs osteoblastogenesis [17]. Our work extends this high-dose impairment in
vivo and to five weeks and one year post-exposure, suggesting an irreversible
insult to osteoblastogenesis.

Gene expression analyses during the proliferative phase (Figure 4D) revealed
that a high dose of 56Fe (200 cGy) increased the expression of genes for the
cell cycle arrest marker _Gadd45_ and antioxidant _Catalase_ relative to sham.
These data are consistent with a G2/M arrest from high-LET irradiation of
mesenchymal stem cells [18], a pre-osteoblast cell line [31], and many other
cell types [32]. Interestingly, these two genes are targets of _Foxo_
transcription factors [33,34,35]. Nrf2, Foxos, and p21 are critical to the
antioxidant response element [36]. Oxidative stress activates Foxo
transcription factors [37] and interferes with Wnt signaling [14,38,39,40].
Hence, our data suggest Foxo activation may play a role in 56Fe irradiation,
decreasing osteoprogenitor cell proliferation, and, ultimately, mineralization
levels.

During the mineralization phase (Figure 4A,B), 56Fe irradiation (200 cGy)
tended to reduce nodule formation and alkaline phosphatase gene expression,
suggesting a reduction in early markers of early-stage osteoblast
differentiation and fewer cells contributing to nodule formation, consistent
with in vitro evidence for high-dose effects [19]. Taken together with gene
expression data, these findings suggest that irradiation induced persistent
oxidative stress that impaired colony formation via reduced proliferation
(e.g., delayed or halted cell division) leading to lower extent of
mineralization. Higher doses of γ irradiation (>500 cGy) are required to
recapitulate the impairment of osteoblastogenesis [41,42], where changes are
also associated with oxidative damage [43]. Taking these findings into
consideration, the sequelae of a high-dose of heavy-ion irradiation are likely
impaired osteoblastogenesis, which may be attributable to persistent oxidative
stress.

For evaluating structural responses, we analyzed cancellous regions in the
tibia (Figure 3) and the cortical midshaft of the femur (Table 1) at two time
points for parameters indicative of structural integrity. At 5-weeks after
irradiation, exposure to high-LET 56Fe irradiation at or above 50 cGy caused
decrements in fractional bone volume and trabecular number, and increases in
trabecular spacing (Figure 3), indicating a significant deterioration of
cancellous microarchitecture, consistent with previous findings [20,22,44].
The magnitude of the changes caused by protons or 56Fe were similar, although
the effect of protons at 50 cGy on BV/TV was not statistically significant
(_p_ = 0.12). Thus, these findings indicate that the threshold for a
persistent, 56Fe radiation-induced response lies between 10 and 50 cGy—doses
relevant to exploration missions [11]. Overall, we show that a high dose of
radiation was able to induce persistent decrements in cancellous bone,
regardless of radiation type (Figure 3). Others have shown that these changes
persist to four months post-exposure [22]. In this study, the structural
decrement affected by 56Fe (200 cGy) was resolved one year after exposure due
to the expected age-related decline in sham-control animals changes over time
(Table 1), likely the product of age-induced elevations of osteoclasts
overtaking waning bone formation by osteoblasts [45]. These data are
consistent with our previous findings from growing female mice after exposure
to low-LET γ radiation [46]. Although others have shown cortical changes
following irradiation with either low-LET γ at high doses (500 cGy) [47] or
high-LET 56Fe at 50 cGy [48], no irradiation-induced cortical responses at
1-year post exposure were evident in this study [23], or in other experiments
we have performed in the past. Thus, the influence of ionizing radiation at
200 cGy or below appears to be restricted to the more metabolically-active
cancellous tissue.

In vitro irradiation studies were conducted to further assess the role of
oxidative stress in radiation damage to osteoprogenitors. Our approach was to
test antioxidants and their capacity to rescue radiation effects to provide
insight into the different mechanisms between low-LET radiation and high-LET
radiation [31]. Although similar doses of low-LET radiation are generally less
deleterious than high-LET radiation, the mechanisms for radiation damage to
primary, marrow-derived osteoprogenitors in the context of oxidative stress
are not fully elucidated [49,50,51]. When comparing the effects of low-LET
radiation (137Cs) and high-LET radiation (56Fe), we found high-LET irradiation
was more damaging with respect to growth of the cell population, as assessed
by a surrogate assay (changes in DNA content over time). Furthermore,
exogenous SOD effectively protected osteoprogenitors from low-LET radiation
damage, but only minimally from 56Fe at 100 cGy, and not at all from 56Fe at
200 cGy. Taken together, these findings indicate excess extracellular reactive
oxygen species (ROS) inhibited growth, and that oxidative stress is possibly
the main mechanism involved in low-LET radiodamage to osteoprogenitors; in
contrast, high-LET species likely affect the cells via additional detrimental
mechanisms, such as double-strand DNA breaks.

Although others [52,53] have shown the beneficial effects of various
antioxidants to confer radioprotection for various osteoblast cell lines, we
show here a direct comparison of antioxidant treatment with different
radiation species when added to primary, marrow-derived osteoprogenitors.
Interestingly, adding SOD at higher doses or for longer periods was not
advantageous, emphasizing the importance of carefully titrating radical
scavengers such as SOD, possibly to maintain endogenous ROS-dependent
signalling.

In sum, we showed the ability of the antioxidant superoxide dismutase (SOD) to
mitigate the adverse effects of in vitro irradiation with γ rays (used for the
low-LET radiation), but not to an equivalent dose of high-LET 56Fe. Our
results strengthen the potential application of SOD as a countermeasure for
low-LET irradiation-induced damage to marrow stem cells and osteoprogenitors.

Inherent limitations of these experiments with respect to radiation exposures
include: (1) exposures were delivered at high dose-rate and fluence in a
matter of minutes, whereas in space, the same dose is delivered at a lower
rate, and (2) space exposures are mixed doses, rather than a single species
(e.g., SPE can deliver 100–200 cGy over days and GCR over years). In addition,
with respect to relevance to spaceflight, these experiments were performed in
mice that were normally ambulatory, thus not subjected to musculoskeletal
disuse and fluid shifts, which are induced by microgravity; groundbased models
for spaceflight have shown that unloading can influence radiosensitivity
[17,24,54,55].

In summary, our findings indicate that although low doses of radiation do not
show lasting effects on skeletal health, a high dose of high-LET 56Fe impairs
osteoblast growth and maturation by adversely affecting growth of
osteoprogenitors. There were few, select changes in steady-state expression of
redox-related genes during osteoblastogenesis ex vivo after total body
irradiation with 56Fe (but not protons), with some indication of altered
expression of select genes during the proliferative phase. Furthermore,
scavenging ROS with antioxidants, such as SOD, mitigated the adverse effects
of in vitro irradiation with γ rays (200 cGy), but failed to protect from
irradiation with an equivalent dose of heavy ions. Together, our findings
indicate that high-dose radiation has a persistent effect to impair bone
formation by adversely affecting growth, but not differentiation, of
osteoprogenitors.

## 4\. Materials and Methods

### 4.1. Animals

Male C57BL/6J mice (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME, USA) were
individually housed under standard conditions and provided food (LabDiet 5001,
Purina, St. Louis, MO, USA) and water _ad libitum_ as described by [13]. As a
general measure of animal health, we measured body mass weekly for the
duration of the study. Additionally, we blindly scored coat color as black or
grey at the one-year post-irradiation endpoint. Animals were euthanized by
cardiac puncture while under isoflurane overdose followed by cervical
dislocation. The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees for NASA Ames
Research Center (Protocol NAS-10-001-Y2, 17 February 2011) and Brookhaven
National Laboratory (Protocol #431, 8 February 2011) approved all of the
procedures.

### 4.2. In Vivo Experiment Design and Radiation Exposure

Two experiments using mice were conducted to assess the effect of radiation
type on skeletal antioxidant response, osteoblastogenesis, and bone structure.
In the first experiment (Figure 1A), conscious 16-weeks old, male, C57BL6/J
mice were exposed to low-LET protons (150 MeV/n, LET ~ 0.52 keV/µm) or high-
LET 56Fe ions (600 MeV/n, LET ~ 175 keV/µm) at 5, 10, 50, or 200 cGy at NASA’s
Space Radiation Lab at Brookhaven National Lab (Upton, NY, USA). Between 7–9
days after irradiation, mice were shipped overnight from Brookhaven to NASA
Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA. Select groups of mice were
euthanized and tissues harvested after 35–38 days for 56Fe, 36–39 days for
proton, or 36–38 days for the sham (these three groups are deemed 5 weeks
post-irradiation and had _n_ = 8 per group) and late (358 or 360 days, here
deemed 1 year post-irradiation and had _n_ = 13 per group) for ex vivo
osteoprogenitor culture of marrow cells. Tibiae or femora were collected for
cancellous microarchitecture assessment with microcomputed tomography. For the
5-week endpoint, osteoblast cultures (_n_ = 6–7 mice/group) were analyzed by
real-time qPCR (_n_ = 4 mice/group, see below for details), total DNA
quantification, and alkaline phosphatase activity during the proliferative
phase (seven days after plating) or the mineralization phase (19–21 days after
plating) stages of osteoblast differentiation. At the termination of cultures,
mineralized nodules were imaged and analyzed for percent surface area at the
end of the culture period. For the 1-year endpoint, osteoblast cultures (_n_ =
6/group) were analyzed for colony number during the proliferative phase (eight
days after plating) or for mineralized nodule area during the mineralization
phase (28 days after plating) of osteoblast differentiation.

In the second experiment (Figure 1B), we aimed to determine the effects of
total-body irradiation on the antioxidant capacity of the extracellular fluid
surrounding the marrow cells [56]. To evaluate ion effects, conscious 16-wk
old, male, C57BL6/J mice mice were exposed to 10 or 200 cGy of low-LET protons
(_n_ = 6–8 per group) or 5 or 200 cGy of high-LET 56Fe ions (_n_ = 8 per
group) as described above, or were sham irradiated (_n_ = 13 per group). Mice
were euthanized and tissues harvested at one or seven days after exposure, at
which point tibial marrow was processed for extracellular fluid collection and
quantification of total antioxidant capacity, described in more detail below.

### 4.3. In Vitro Experiment Design and Radiation Exposure

Osteoprogenitors were grown in vitro from the bone marrow of 16-week old, male
C57Bl/6 mice, as previously described [17]. Cells were irradiated three days
after plating (day 3) with either γ (137Cs, sham or 10–500 cGy, JL Shepherd
Mark I) or 56Fe (sham or 50–200 cGy, NSRL), and then grown until day 10. Cell
behavior was assessed by measuring changes in DNA content between day three
and day 10 (as a surrogate for cell growth) with the Cyquant assay as
previously described [17]. For the SOD experiment, multiple doses were tested
in preliminary experiments (100–600 U/mL of SOD or vehicle, for 2 or 3 days of
treatment at different times). The protocol selected for more extensive dose-
response experiments entailed the addition of SOD (200 U/mL), or vehicle
(α-MEM) 2 h before irradiation (day 3), twice a day, through the 4th day after
exposure to radiation. Experiments were repeated 2–3 times. Data were
normalized to the sham-control.

### 4.4. Total Antioxidant Capacity

We measured the antioxidant capacity of the extracellular fluid of the marrow
(i.e., the marrow plasma) with a colorimetric assay based on the reduction
potential of Cu2+ to Cu1+ as compared to Trolox equivalent standards (Oxford
Biomedical, Oxford, MI, USA). In brief, we isolated marrow ex vivo, using 150
µL of sterile saline to flush the marrow from the tibial diaphysis, as
described previously [56]. The solution was centrifuged and supernatant
preserved as the extracellular fluid at −80 °C for further assessment. The BCA
assay assessed the protein concentration of the extracellular fluid against
albumin standards, which enabled the normalization of the antioxidant capacity
by the protein concentration to account for changes in protein levels with
treatment [56].

### 4.5. Bone Microarchitecture and Geometry

We assessed the bone volume and microarchitecture of the cancellous tissue in
the proximal tibial metaphysis using microcomputed tomography (6.7 µm pixel
size, 3500 ms integration time, 50 kV, Skyscan 1174; Bruker microCT, Kontich,
Belgium) as described in [13]. For cancellous quantification, a 1.0-mm thick
region located 0.24 mm distal to the proximal growth plate was semi-
autonomously contoured to include cancellous tissue. We assessed changes in
cancellous bone using the three-dimensional bone volume to total volume
fraction (BV/TV, %), trabecular thickness (Tb.Th, mm), trabecular number
(Tb.N, 1/mm), trabecular thickness (Tb.Th, mm), and trabecular separation
(Tb.Sp, mm). We assessed the changes in cortical bone at the midshaft of the
femur using bone volume and cortical thickness. All analyses follow
conventional guidelines [57].

### 4.6. Ex Vivo Osteoblastogenic Assays and qRT-PCR Analyses

For osteoblastogenic culture, femur marrow was flushed using saline and
treated with lysis buffer specific for red blood cells (Sigma-Aldrich, St.
Louis, MO, USA), centrifuged for ten minutes at 1000× _g_ , and supernatant
removed. Cells were then re-suspended and plated at 3.0 × 105 cells/cm2 in
6-well plates. Osteoblastogenic growth medium (alpha minimum essential medium
with 15% FBS (Gibco, Gaithersburg, MD, USA), 1× anti-biotic/mycotic, 50 µg/mL
ascorbic acid, 10 mM β-glycerophosphate) was replenished every 2–3 days.

For qPCR analyses (_n_ = 4/group), cells were collected in a solution of 1%
β-mercapthoethanol in RLT Buffer (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) and stored at −80
°C until RNA isolation via RNeasy minikit (Qiagen). RNA quantity and purity
was measured using a nanodrop spectrophotometer (Nanodrop 2000,
Thermoscientific, Waltham, MA, USA) while RNA quality was assessed using a
0.8% non-denaturing gel. A RT2PCR custom array (PAMM-999A-1, SYBR probes,
Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was processed with an Applied Biosystems 7500 cycler
to generate gene expression data. The ΔΔ _C_ t method was used to analyze the
raw data. Cycle values above 35 were defined as non-detectable. Statistical
analyses were performed on log2-transformed data. Fifteen representative genes
were analyzed to assess osteoblast differentiation, proliferation, oxidative
metabolism, or apoptosis, see Table 3. All genes were normalized to
housekeeping gene _Hprt_. Technical issues forced the loss of one specimen
from the 56Fe, 200 cGy group during the proliferative phase and the loss of
all four specimens in the proton, 10 cGy group from mineralization phase.

#### Table 3.

SYBR-based custom array to query changes in expression levels of key genes.

Gene Name | Accession No. | Official Name | Process  
---|---|---|---  
_Runx2_ | [NM_009820](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_009820) | Runt Related Transcription Factor 2 | Differentiation  
_Bglap_ | [NM_007541](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_007541) | Bone γ carboxyglutamate protein (osteocalcin) | Differentiation  
_Alpl_ | [NM_007431](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_007431) | Alkaline Phosphatase Ligand | Differentiation  
_Pcna_ | [NM_011045](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_011045) | Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen | Proliferation  
_Cdk2_ | [NM_016756](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_016756) | Cyclin-dependent Kinase 2 | Proliferation  
_p21_ | [NM_007669](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_007669) | Cyclin-dependent Kinase Inhibitor 1 | Proliferation  
_p53_ | [NM_011640](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_011640) | Transformation-related protein 53 | Proliferation  
_Cat_ | [NM_009804](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_009804) | Catalase | Oxidative Metabolism  
_Gpx1_ | [NM_008160](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_008160) | Glutathione Peroxidase | Oxidative Metabolism  
_MnSod_ | [NM_013671](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_013671) | Superoxide Dismutase 2, Mitochondrial | Oxidative Metabolism  
_CuZnSod_ | [NM_011434](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_011434) | Superoxide Dismutase | Oxidative Metabolism  
_iNos [Nos2]_ | [NM_010927](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_010927) | Nitric Oxide Synthase 2, Inducible | Oxidative Metabolism  
_Foxo1_ | [NM_019739](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_019739) | Forkhead Box | Oxidative Metabolism  
_Gadd45a_ | [NM_007836](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_007836) | Growth Arrest and DNA Damage | Oxidative Metabolism  
_Caspase 3_ | [NM_009810](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_009810) | Caspase 3 | Apoptosis  
_Hprt_ | [NM_013556](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_013556) | Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase | Housekeeping  
  
[Open in a new tab](table/ijms-18-02117-t003/)

For ALP and DNA analyses, cells were collected in a solution of Tris buffer
containing Triton-X and MgCl2 and stored at −80 °C. Quantification of ALP
enzymatic activity and total DNA content was performed using Alkaline
Phosphatase Activity Colorimetric Assay (Biovision, Mountain View, CA, USA)
and CyQuant Cell Proliferation Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham,
MA, USA), respectively.

Colony counts early in culture assessed the successful adherence and
proliferation of colony forming units. Parameters defining a colony included
having distinct region of radial colony growth and having more than 30 cells
with a majority of cells having of morphological homogeneity.

To quantify densely mineralizing area (i.e., the nodule area), we harvested
cultures in the differentiation phase. First, we washed cultures with saline
and scanned the plates at 300 dpi resolution. We quantified the percentage of
well area having mineralizing nodules with Image J, using a custom algorithm
to threshold the grayscale image.

### 4.7. Statistics

We report parametric data with mean and standard deviation (SD). For these
data, to determine significant differences, a 1-way analysis of variance was
used followed by Dunnett’s post-hoc test, which allowed for the comparison of
respective radiation types and doses to the age-matched sham control (0 cGy).
For non-parametric data (i.e., nodule area data, as values near zero display
skew), we report the median with interquartile range. For these data, to
determine significant differences, we used a Kruskal-Wallis test with a Steel
post-hoc test, which allowed for the comparison of respective radiation types
and doses to the age-matched, sham control (0 cGy). We assessed temporal
(within subjects) treatment (between subjects) effects in body mass, and their
interaction (i.e., time × treatment), using Repeated Measures ANOVA and Wilks’
Lamda test. Throughout, a _p_ -value ≤ 0.05 was accepted as significant. We
performed all analyses using JMP 13 (SAS).

## Acknowledgments

Research was supported by National Space Biomedical Research Institute grant #
MA02501 (RKG, JSA) under NASA cooperative agreement NCC 9-58, a DOE-NASA
Interagency Award #DE-SC0001507, supported by the Office of Science (BER),
U.S. Department of Energy (RKG), and NASA Postdoctoral Program fellowships
(AS, AK, JSA). The authors thank Charles Limoli (UC Irvine) for his valuable
scientific input and consultation. We thank the Brookhaven National Laboratory
Animal Care Facility and NASA Space Radiation Laboratory staff Peter Guida,
Adam Rusek, MaryAnn Petry, Kerry Bonti, Angela Kim, and Laura Loudenslager for
their assistance with this experiment. We thank Nicholas Thomas for careful
reading and editing of the manuscript and Samantha Torres for supporting the
animal experiments.

## Author Contributions

Conceived and Designed Experiments: Joshua S. Alwood, Ruth K. Globus, Ann-
Sofie Schreurs, Akhilesh Kumar, Luan H. Tran. Supported/Conducted Experiments:
Joshua S. Alwood, Luan H. Tran, Ann-Sofie Schreurs, Yasaman Shirazi-Fard,
Akhilesh Kumar, Candice G. T. Tahimic, Ruth K. Globus. Collected Data: Joshua
S. Alwood, Luan H. Tran, Ann-Sofie Schreurs, Akhilesh Kumar, Diane Hilton.
Interpreted Data: Joshua S. Alwood, Luan H. Tran, Ann-Sofie Schreurs, Yasaman
Shirazi-Fard, Akhilesh Kumar, Diane Hilton, Candice G. T. Tahimic, Ruth K.
Globus. Wrote and edited the Manuscript: Joshua S. Alwood, Ann-Sofie Schreurs,
Luan H. Tran, Ruth K. Globus.

## Conflict of Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## References

  * 1.McPhee J.C., Charles J.B. Human Health and Peformance Risks of Space Exploration Missions. Government Printing Office; Washington, DC, USA: 2009.  [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Human%20Health%20and%20Peformance%20Risks%20of%20Space%20Exploration%20Missions&author=J.C.%20McPhee&author=J.B.%20Charles&publication_year=2009&)]
  * 2.Guo J., Zeitlin C., Wimmer-Schweingruber R.F., Hassler D.M., Ehresmann B., Kohler J., Bohm E., Bottcher S., Brinza D., Burmeister S., et al. Msl-rad radiation environment measurements. Radiat. Prot. Dosimetry. 2015;166:290–294. doi: 10.1093/rpd/ncv297. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/ncv297)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25969529/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Prot.%20Dosimetry&title=Msl-rad%20radiation%20environment%20measurements&author=J.%20Guo&author=C.%20Zeitlin&author=R.F.%20Wimmer-Schweingruber&author=D.M.%20Hassler&author=B.%20Ehresmann&volume=166&publication_year=2015&pages=290-294&pmid=25969529&doi=10.1093/rpd/ncv297&)]
  * 3.Dietze G., Bartlett D.T., Cool D.A., Cucinotta F.A., Jia X., McAulay I.R., Pelliccioni M., Petrov V., Reitz G., Sato T. Icrp publication 123: Assessment of radiation exposure of astronauts in space. Ann. ICRP. 2013 doi: 10.1016/j.icrp.2013.05.004. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icrp.2013.05.004)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23958389/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann.%20ICRP&title=Icrp%20publication%20123:%20Assessment%20of%20radiation%20exposure%20of%20astronauts%20in%20space&author=G.%20Dietze&author=D.T.%20Bartlett&author=D.A.%20Cool&author=F.A.%20Cucinotta&author=X.%20Jia&publication_year=2013&pmid=23958389&doi=10.1016/j.icrp.2013.05.004&)]
  * 4.Durante M., Cucinotta F.A. Physical basis of radiation protection in space travel. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2011;83:1245–1281. doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.83.1245. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.83.1245)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Rev.%20Mod.%20Phys.&title=Physical%20basis%20of%20radiation%20protection%20in%20space%20travel&author=M.%20Durante&author=F.A.%20Cucinotta&volume=83&publication_year=2011&pages=1245-1281&doi=10.1103/RevModPhys.83.1245&)]
  * 5.Tseng B.P., Giedzinski E., Izadi A., Suarez T., Lan M.L., Tran K.K., Acharya M.M., Nelson G.A., Raber J., Parihar V.K., et al. Functional consequences of radiation-induced oxidative stress in cultured neural stem cells and the brain exposed to charged particle irradiation. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 2014;20:1410–1422. doi: 10.1089/ars.2012.5134. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1089/ars.2012.5134)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC3936501/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23802883/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Antioxid.%20Redox%20Signal.&title=Functional%20consequences%20of%20radiation-induced%20oxidative%20stress%20in%20cultured%20neural%20stem%20cells%20and%20the%20brain%20exposed%20to%20charged%20particle%20irradiation&author=B.P.%20Tseng&author=E.%20Giedzinski&author=A.%20Izadi&author=T.%20Suarez&author=M.L.%20Lan&volume=20&publication_year=2014&pages=1410-1422&pmid=23802883&doi=10.1089/ars.2012.5134&)]
  * 6.Datta K., Suman S., Fornace A.J., Jr. Radiation persistently promoted oxidative stress, activated mtor via pi3k/akt, and downregulated autophagy pathway in mouse intestine. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 2014;57:167–176. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.10.022. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocel.2014.10.022)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4363107/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25449263/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Biochem.%20Cell%20Biol.&title=Radiation%20persistently%20promoted%20oxidative%20stress,%20activated%20mtor%20via%20pi3k/akt,%20and%20downregulated%20autophagy%20pathway%20in%20mouse%20intestine&author=K.%20Datta&author=S.%20Suman&author=A.J.%20Fornace&volume=57&publication_year=2014&pages=167-176&pmid=25449263&doi=10.1016/j.biocel.2014.10.022&)]
  * 7.Norbury J.W., Slaba T.C. Space radiation accelerator experiments – the role of neutrons and light ions. Life Sci. Space Res. 2014;3:90–94. doi: 10.1016/j.lssr.2014.09.006. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lssr.2014.09.006)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Life%20Sci.%20Space%20Res.&title=Space%20radiation%20accelerator%20experiments%20%E2%80%93%20the%20role%20of%20neutrons%20and%20light%20ions&author=J.W.%20Norbury&author=T.C.%20Slaba&volume=3&publication_year=2014&pages=90-94&doi=10.1016/j.lssr.2014.09.006&)]
  * 8.Hassler D.M., Zeitlin C., Wimmer-Schweingruber R.F., Ehresmann B., Rafkin S., Eigenbrode J.L., Brinza D.E., Weigle G., Bottcher S., Bohm E., et al. Mars’ surface radiation environment measured with the mars science laboratory’s curiosity rover. Science. 2014;343:1244797. doi: 10.1126/science.1244797. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1244797)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24324275/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=Mars%E2%80%99%20surface%20radiation%20environment%20measured%20with%20the%20mars%20science%20laboratory%E2%80%99s%20curiosity%20rover&author=D.M.%20Hassler&author=C.%20Zeitlin&author=R.F.%20Wimmer-Schweingruber&author=B.%20Ehresmann&author=S.%20Rafkin&volume=343&publication_year=2014&pages=1244797&pmid=24324275&doi=10.1126/science.1244797&)]
  * 9.Zeitlin C., Hassler D.M., Cucinotta F.A., Ehresmann B., Wimmer-Schweingruber R.F., Brinza D.E., Kang S., Weigle G., Bottcher S., Bohm E., et al. Measurements of energetic particle radiation in transit to mars on the mars science laboratory. Science. 2013;340:1080–1084. doi: 10.1126/science.1235989. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1235989)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23723233/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=Measurements%20of%20energetic%20particle%20radiation%20in%20transit%20to%20mars%20on%20the%20mars%20science%20laboratory&author=C.%20Zeitlin&author=D.M.%20Hassler&author=F.A.%20Cucinotta&author=B.%20Ehresmann&author=R.F.%20Wimmer-Schweingruber&volume=340&publication_year=2013&pages=1080-1084&pmid=23723233&doi=10.1126/science.1235989&)]
  * 10.NASA . Nasa std-3001, Space Flight Human-System Standard Volume 1, Revision a, Change 1: Crew Health. NASA; Washington, DC, USA: 2015.  [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Nasa%20std-3001,%20Space%20Flight%20Human-System%20Standard%20Volume%201,%20Revision%20a,%20Change%201:%20Crew%20Health&publication_year=2015&)]
  * 11.Townsend L.W., Badhwar G.D., Braby L.A., Blakely E.A., Cucinotta F.A., Curtis S.B., Fry R.J.M., Land C.E., Smart D.F. Report No. 153-Information Needed to Make Radiation Protection Recommendations for Space Missions Beyond Low-Earth Orbit. US National Council for Radiation Protection and Measurements; Bethesda, MD, USA: 2006.  [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Report%20No.%20153-Information%20Needed%20to%20Make%20Radiation%20Protection%20Recommendations%20for%20Space%20Missions%20Beyond%20Low-Earth%20Orbit&author=L.W.%20Townsend&author=G.D.%20Badhwar&author=L.A.%20Braby&author=E.A.%20Blakely&author=F.A.%20Cucinotta&publication_year=2006&)]
  * 12.Kondo H., Yumoto K., Alwood J.S., Mojarrab R., Wang A., Almeida E.A., Searby N.D., Limoli C.L., Globus R.K. Oxidative stress and gamma radiation-induced cancellous bone loss with musculoskeletal disuse. J. Appl. Physiol. 2010;108:152–161. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00294.2009. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.00294.2009)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC2885070/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19875718/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Appl.%20Physiol.&title=Oxidative%20stress%20and%20gamma%20radiation-induced%20cancellous%20bone%20loss%20with%20musculoskeletal%20disuse&author=H.%20Kondo&author=K.%20Yumoto&author=J.S.%20Alwood&author=R.%20Mojarrab&author=A.%20Wang&volume=108&publication_year=2010&pages=152-161&pmid=19875718&doi=10.1152/japplphysiol.00294.2009&)]
  * 13.Alwood J.S., Shahnazari M., Chicana B., Schreurs A.S., Kumar A., Bartolini A., Shirazi-Fard Y., Globus R.K. Ionizing radiation stimulates expression of pro-osteoclastogenic genes in marrow and skeletal tissue. J. Interferon Cytokine Res. 2015;35:480–487. doi: 10.1089/jir.2014.0152. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1089/jir.2014.0152)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4490751/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25734366/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Interferon%20Cytokine%20Res.&title=Ionizing%20radiation%20stimulates%20expression%20of%20pro-osteoclastogenic%20genes%20in%20marrow%20and%20skeletal%20tissue&author=J.S.%20Alwood&author=M.%20Shahnazari&author=B.%20Chicana&author=A.S.%20Schreurs&author=A.%20Kumar&volume=35&publication_year=2015&pages=480-487&pmid=25734366&doi=10.1089/jir.2014.0152&)]
  * 14.Almeida M., Ambrogini E., Han L., Manolagas S.C., Jilka R.L. Increased lipid oxidation causes oxidative stress, increased peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma expression, and diminished pro-osteogenic wnt signaling in the skeleton. J. Biol. Chem. 2009;284:27438–27448. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.023572. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.023572)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC2785673/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19657144/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biol.%20Chem.&title=Increased%20lipid%20oxidation%20causes%20oxidative%20stress,%20increased%20peroxisome%20proliferator-activated%20receptor-gamma%20expression,%20and%20diminished%20pro-osteogenic%20wnt%20signaling%20in%20the%20skeleton&author=M.%20Almeida&author=E.%20Ambrogini&author=L.%20Han&author=S.C.%20Manolagas&author=R.L.%20Jilka&volume=284&publication_year=2009&pages=27438-27448&pmid=19657144&doi=10.1074/jbc.M109.023572&)]
  * 15.Manolagas S.C., Almeida M. Gone with the wnts: Beta-catenin, t-cell factor, forkhead box o, and oxidative stress in age-dependent diseases of bone, lipid, and glucose metabolism. Mol. Endocrinol. 2007;21:2605–2614. doi: 10.1210/me.2007-0259. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1210/me.2007-0259)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17622581/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Endocrinol.&title=Gone%20with%20the%20wnts:%20Beta-catenin,%20t-cell%20factor,%20forkhead%20box%20o,%20and%20oxidative%20stress%20in%20age-dependent%20diseases%20of%20bone,%20lipid,%20and%20glucose%20metabolism&author=S.C.%20Manolagas&author=M.%20Almeida&volume=21&publication_year=2007&pages=2605-2614&pmid=17622581&doi=10.1210/me.2007-0259&)]
  * 16.Lean J.M., Jagger C.J., Kirstein B., Fuller K., Chambers T.J. Hydrogen peroxide is essential for estrogen-deficiency bone loss and osteoclast formation. Endocrinology. 2005;146:728–735. doi: 10.1210/en.2004-1021. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2004-1021)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15528306/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Endocrinology&title=Hydrogen%20peroxide%20is%20essential%20for%20estrogen-deficiency%20bone%20loss%20and%20osteoclast%20formation&author=J.M.%20Lean&author=C.J.%20Jagger&author=B.%20Kirstein&author=K.%20Fuller&author=T.J.%20Chambers&volume=146&publication_year=2005&pages=728-735&pmid=15528306&doi=10.1210/en.2004-1021&)]
  * 17.Yumoto K., Globus R.K., Mojarrab R., Arakaki J., Wang A., Searby N.D., Almeida E.A., Limoli C.L. Short-term effects of whole-body exposure to (56)fe ions in combination with musculoskeletal disuse on bone cells. Radiat. Res. 2010;173:494–504. doi: 10.1667/RR1754.1. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR1754.1)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20334522/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res.&title=Short-term%20effects%20of%20whole-body%20exposure%20to%20\(56\)fe%20ions%20in%20combination%20with%20musculoskeletal%20disuse%20on%20bone%20cells&author=K.%20Yumoto&author=R.K.%20Globus&author=R.%20Mojarrab&author=J.%20Arakaki&author=A.%20Wang&volume=173&publication_year=2010&pages=494-504&pmid=20334522&doi=10.1667/RR1754.1&)]
  * 18.Kurpinski K., Jang D.J., Bhattacharya S., Rydberg B., Chu J., So J., Wyrobek A., Li S., Wang D. Differential effects of x-rays and high-energy 56fe ions on human mesenchymal stem cells. Int.J.Radiat.Oncol.Biol.Phys. 2009;73:869–877. doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.10.002. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.10.002)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19101095/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.J.Radiat.Oncol.Biol.Phys.&title=Differential%20effects%20of%20x-rays%20and%20high-energy%2056fe%20ions%20on%20human%20mesenchymal%20stem%20cells&author=K.%20Kurpinski&author=D.J.%20Jang&author=S.%20Bhattacharya&author=B.%20Rydberg&author=J.%20Chu&volume=73&publication_year=2009&pages=869-877&pmid=19101095&doi=10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.10.002&)]
  * 19.Kook S.H., Kim K.A., Ji H., Lee D., Lee J.C. Irradiation inhibits the maturation and mineralization of osteoblasts via the activation of nrf2/ho-1 pathway. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 2015;410:255–266. doi: 10.1007/s11010-015-2559-z. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11010-015-2559-z)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26346162/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Cell.%20Biochem.&title=Irradiation%20inhibits%20the%20maturation%20and%20mineralization%20of%20osteoblasts%20via%20the%20activation%20of%20nrf2/ho-1%20pathway&author=S.H.%20Kook&author=K.A.%20Kim&author=H.%20Ji&author=D.%20Lee&author=J.C.%20Lee&volume=410&publication_year=2015&pages=255-266&pmid=26346162&doi=10.1007/s11010-015-2559-z&)]
  * 20.Willey J.S., Livingston E.W., Robbins M.E., Bourland J.D., Tirado-Lee L., Smith-Sielicki H., Bateman T.A. Risedronate prevents early radiation-induced osteoporosis in mice at multiple skeletal locations. Bone. 2010;46:101–111. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2009.09.002. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2009.09.002)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC2818222/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19747571/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Risedronate%20prevents%20early%20radiation-induced%20osteoporosis%20in%20mice%20at%20multiple%20skeletal%20locations&author=J.S.%20Willey&author=E.W.%20Livingston&author=M.E.%20Robbins&author=J.D.%20Bourland&author=L.%20Tirado-Lee&volume=46&publication_year=2010&pages=101-111&pmid=19747571&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2009.09.002&)]
  * 21.Lima F., Swift J.M., Greene E.S., Allen M.R., Cunningham D.A., Braby L.A., Bloomfield S.A. Exposure to low-dose x-ray radiation alters bone progenitor cells and bone microarchitecture. Radiat. Res. 2017;188:433–442. doi: 10.1667/RR14414.1. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR14414.1)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28771086/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res.&title=Exposure%20to%20low-dose%20x-ray%20radiation%20alters%20bone%20progenitor%20cells%20and%20bone%20microarchitecture&author=F.%20Lima&author=J.M.%20Swift&author=E.S.%20Greene&author=M.R.%20Allen&author=D.A.%20Cunningham&volume=188&publication_year=2017&pages=433-442&pmid=28771086&doi=10.1667/RR14414.1&)]
  * 22.Hamilton S.A., Pecaut M.J., Gridley D.S., Travis N.D., Bandstra E.R., Willey J.S., Nelson G.A., Bateman T.A. A murine model for bone loss from therapeutic and space-relevant sources of radiation. J. Appl. Physiol. 2006;101:789–793. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01078.2005. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.01078.2005)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16741258/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Appl.%20Physiol.&title=A%20murine%20model%20for%20bone%20loss%20from%20therapeutic%20and%20space-relevant%20sources%20of%20radiation&author=S.A.%20Hamilton&author=M.J.%20Pecaut&author=D.S.%20Gridley&author=N.D.%20Travis&author=E.R.%20Bandstra&volume=101&publication_year=2006&pages=789-793&pmid=16741258&doi=10.1152/japplphysiol.01078.2005&)]
  * 23.Alwood J.S., Tran L.H., Schreurs A.-S., Shirazi-Fard Y., Kumar A., Hilton D., Tahimic C.G.T., Globus R.K. Data not Shown. NASA Ames Research Center; Moffett Field, CA, USA: 2017.  [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Data%20not%20Shown&author=J.S.%20Alwood&author=L.H.%20Tran&author=A.-S.%20Schreurs&author=Y.%20Shirazi-Fard&author=A.%20Kumar&publication_year=2017&)]
  * 24.Macias B.R., Lima F., Swift J.M., Shirazi-Fard Y., Greene E.S., Allen M.R., Fluckey J., Hogan H.A., Braby L., Wang S., et al. Simulating the lunar environment: Partial weightbearing and high-let radiation-induce bone loss and increase sclerostin-positive osteocytes. Radiat. Res. 2016;186:254–263. doi: 10.1667/RR13579.1. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR13579.1)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27538114/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res.&title=Simulating%20the%20lunar%20environment:%20Partial%20weightbearing%20and%20high-let%20radiation-induce%20bone%20loss%20and%20increase%20sclerostin-positive%20osteocytes&author=B.R.%20Macias&author=F.%20Lima&author=J.M.%20Swift&author=Y.%20Shirazi-Fard&author=E.S.%20Greene&volume=186&publication_year=2016&pages=254-263&pmid=27538114&doi=10.1667/RR13579.1&)]
  * 25.Wood J.M., Decker H., Hartmann H., Chavan B., Rokos H., Spencer J.D., Hasse S., Thornton M.J., Shalbaf M., Paus R., et al. Senile hair graying: H2o2-mediated oxidative stress affects human hair color by blunting methionine sulfoxide repair. FASEB J. 2009;23:2065–2075. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-125435. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.08-125435)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19237503/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=FASEB%20J.&title=Senile%20hair%20graying:%20H2o2-mediated%20oxidative%20stress%20affects%20human%20hair%20color%20by%20blunting%20methionine%20sulfoxide%20repair&author=J.M.%20Wood&author=H.%20Decker&author=H.%20Hartmann&author=B.%20Chavan&author=H.%20Rokos&volume=23&publication_year=2009&pages=2065-2075&pmid=19237503&doi=10.1096/fj.08-125435&)]
  * 26.Harman D. Free radical theory of aging: An update: Increasing the functional life span. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2006;1067:10–21. doi: 10.1196/annals.1354.003. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1196/annals.1354.003)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16803965/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann.%20N.%20Y.%20Acad.%20Sci.&title=Free%20radical%20theory%20of%20aging:%20An%20update:%20Increasing%20the%20functional%20life%20span&author=D.%20Harman&volume=1067&publication_year=2006&pages=10-21&pmid=16803965&doi=10.1196/annals.1354.003&)]
  * 27.Harman D. Aging: A theory based on free radical and radiation chemistry. J. Gerontol. 1956;11:298–300. doi: 10.1093/geronj/11.3.298. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/geronj/11.3.298)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/13332224/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Gerontol.&title=Aging:%20A%20theory%20based%20on%20free%20radical%20and%20radiation%20chemistry&author=D.%20Harman&volume=11&publication_year=1956&pages=298-300&pmid=13332224&doi=10.1093/geronj/11.3.298&)]
  * 28.Kondo H., Searby N.D., Mojarrab R., Phillips J., Alwood J., Yumoto K., Almeida E.A.C., Limoli C.L., Globus R.K. Total-body irradiation of postpubertal mice with 137cs acutely compromises the microarchitecture of cancellous bone and increases osteoclasts. Radiat. Res. 2009;171:283–289. doi: 10.1667/RR1463.1. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR1463.1)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19267555/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res.&title=Total-body%20irradiation%20of%20postpubertal%20mice%20with%20137cs%20acutely%20compromises%20the%20microarchitecture%20of%20cancellous%20bone%20and%20increases%20osteoclasts&author=H.%20Kondo&author=N.D.%20Searby&author=R.%20Mojarrab&author=J.%20Phillips&author=J.%20Alwood&volume=171&publication_year=2009&pages=283-289&pmid=19267555&doi=10.1667/RR1463.1&)]
  * 29.Greenberger J.S., Epperly M. Bone marrow-derived stem cells and radiation response. Semin. Radiat. Oncol. 2009;19:133–139. doi: 10.1016/j.semradonc.2008.11.006. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semradonc.2008.11.006)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC6592616/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19249651/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Semin.%20Radiat.%20Oncol.&title=Bone%20marrow-derived%20stem%20cells%20and%20radiation%20response&author=J.S.%20Greenberger&author=M.%20Epperly&volume=19&publication_year=2009&pages=133-139&pmid=19249651&doi=10.1016/j.semradonc.2008.11.006&)]
  * 30.Schreurs A.S., Shirazi-Fard Y., Shahnazari M., Alwood J.S., Truong T.A., Tahimic C.G., Limoli C.L., Turner N.D., Halloran B., Globus R.K. Dried plum diet protects from bone loss caused by ionizing radiation. Sci. Rep. 2016;6:21343. doi: 10.1038/srep21343. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/srep21343)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4750446/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26867002/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sci.%20Rep.&title=Dried%20plum%20diet%20protects%20from%20bone%20loss%20caused%20by%20ionizing%20radiation&author=A.S.%20Schreurs&author=Y.%20Shirazi-Fard&author=M.%20Shahnazari&author=J.S.%20Alwood&author=T.A.%20Truong&volume=6&publication_year=2016&pages=21343&pmid=26867002&doi=10.1038/srep21343&)]
  * 31.Hu Y., Hellweg C.E., Baumstark-Khan C., Reitz G., Lau P. Cell cycle delay in murine pre-osteoblasts is more pronounced after exposure to high-let compared to low-let radiation. Radiat. Environ. Biophys. 2014;53:73–81. doi: 10.1007/s00411-013-0499-0. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00411-013-0499-0)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24240273/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Environ.%20Biophys.&title=Cell%20cycle%20delay%20in%20murine%20pre-osteoblasts%20is%20more%20pronounced%20after%20exposure%20to%20high-let%20compared%20to%20low-let%20radiation&author=Y.%20Hu&author=C.E.%20Hellweg&author=C.%20Baumstark-Khan&author=G.%20Reitz&author=P.%20Lau&volume=53&publication_year=2014&pages=73-81&pmid=24240273&doi=10.1007/s00411-013-0499-0&)]
  * 32.Snyder A.R., Morgan W.F. Gene expression profiling after irradiation: Clues to understanding acute and persistent responses? Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2004;23:259–268. doi: 10.1023/B:CANC.0000031765.17886.fa. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1023/B:CANC.0000031765.17886.fa)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15197327/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Metastasis%20Rev.&title=Gene%20expression%20profiling%20after%20irradiation:%20Clues%20to%20understanding%20acute%20and%20persistent%20responses?&author=A.R.%20Snyder&author=W.F.%20Morgan&volume=23&publication_year=2004&pages=259-268&pmid=15197327&doi=10.1023/B:CANC.0000031765.17886.fa&)]
  * 33.Tran H., Brunet A., Grenier J.M., Datta S.R., Fornace A.J., DiStefano P.S., Chiang L.W., Greenberg M.E. DNA repair pathway stimulated by the forkhead transcription factor foxo3a through the gadd45 protein. Science. 2002;296:530–534. doi: 10.1126/science.1068712. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1068712)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11964479/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=DNA%20repair%20pathway%20stimulated%20by%20the%20forkhead%20transcription%20factor%20foxo3a%20through%20the%20gadd45%20protein&author=H.%20Tran&author=A.%20Brunet&author=J.M.%20Grenier&author=S.R.%20Datta&author=A.J.%20Fornace&volume=296&publication_year=2002&pages=530-534&pmid=11964479&doi=10.1126/science.1068712&)]
  * 34.Furukawa-Hibi Y., Yoshida-Araki K., Ohta T., Ikeda K., Motoyama N. Foxo forkhead transcription factors induce g(2)-m checkpoint in response to oxidative stress. J. Biol. Chem. 2002;277:26729–26732. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C200256200. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C200256200)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12048180/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biol.%20Chem.&title=Foxo%20forkhead%20transcription%20factors%20induce%20g\(2\)-m%20checkpoint%20in%20response%20to%20oxidative%20stress&author=Y.%20Furukawa-Hibi&author=K.%20Yoshida-Araki&author=T.%20Ohta&author=K.%20Ikeda&author=N.%20Motoyama&volume=277&publication_year=2002&pages=26729-26732&pmid=12048180&doi=10.1074/jbc.C200256200&)]
  * 35.Bartell S.M., Kim H.N., Ambrogini E., Han L., Iyer S., Serra Ucer S., Rabinovitch P., Jilka R.L., Weinstein R.S., Zhao H., et al. Foxo proteins restrain osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption by attenuating h2o2 accumulation. Nat. Commun. 2014;5:3773. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4773. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms4773)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4015330/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24781012/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Commun.&title=Foxo%20proteins%20restrain%20osteoclastogenesis%20and%20bone%20resorption%20by%20attenuating%20h2o2%20accumulation&author=S.M.%20Bartell&author=H.N.%20Kim&author=E.%20Ambrogini&author=L.%20Han&author=S.%20Iyer&volume=5&publication_year=2014&pages=3773&pmid=24781012&doi=10.1038/ncomms4773&)]
  * 36.Gorrini C., Harris I.S., Mak T.W. Modulation of oxidative stress as an anticancer strategy. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 2013;12:931–947. doi: 10.1038/nrd4002. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrd4002)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24287781/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Rev.%20Drug%20Discov.&title=Modulation%20of%20oxidative%20stress%20as%20an%20anticancer%20strategy&author=C.%20Gorrini&author=I.S.%20Harris&author=T.W.%20Mak&volume=12&publication_year=2013&pages=931-947&pmid=24287781&doi=10.1038/nrd4002&)]
  * 37.Klotz L.O., Sanchez-Ramos C., Prieto-Arroyo I., Urbanek P., Steinbrenner H., Monsalve M. Redox regulation of foxo transcription factors. Redox. Biol. 2015;6:51–72. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2015.06.019. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2015.06.019)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4511623/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26184557/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Redox.%20Biol.&title=Redox%20regulation%20of%20foxo%20transcription%20factors&author=L.O.%20Klotz&author=C.%20Sanchez-Ramos&author=I.%20Prieto-Arroyo&author=P.%20Urbanek&author=H.%20Steinbrenner&volume=6&publication_year=2015&pages=51-72&pmid=26184557&doi=10.1016/j.redox.2015.06.019&)]
  * 38.Hoogeboom D., Essers M.A., Polderman P.E., Voets E., Smits L.M., Burgering B.M. Interaction of foxo with beta-catenin inhibits beta-catenin/t cell factor activity. J. Biol. Chem. 2008;283:9224–9230. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M706638200. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M706638200)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18250171/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biol.%20Chem.&title=Interaction%20of%20foxo%20with%20beta-catenin%20inhibits%20beta-catenin/t%20cell%20factor%20activity&author=D.%20Hoogeboom&author=M.A.%20Essers&author=P.E.%20Polderman&author=E.%20Voets&author=L.M.%20Smits&volume=283&publication_year=2008&pages=9224-9230&pmid=18250171&doi=10.1074/jbc.M706638200&)]
  * 39.Essers M.A., de Vries-Smits L.M., Barker N., Polderman P.E., Burgering B.M., Korswagen H.C. Functional interaction between beta-catenin and foxo in oxidative stress signaling. Science. 2005;308:1181–1184. doi: 10.1126/science.1109083. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1109083)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15905404/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=Functional%20interaction%20between%20beta-catenin%20and%20foxo%20in%20oxidative%20stress%20signaling&author=M.A.%20Essers&author=L.M.%20de%20Vries-Smits&author=N.%20Barker&author=P.E.%20Polderman&author=B.M.%20Burgering&volume=308&publication_year=2005&pages=1181-1184&pmid=15905404&doi=10.1126/science.1109083&)]
  * 40.Maiese K., Chong Z.Z., Shang Y.C., Hou J. Rogue proliferation versus restorative protection: Where do we draw the line for wnt and forkhead signaling? Expert Opin. Ther. Targets. 2008;12:905–916. doi: 10.1517/14728222.12.7.905. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1517/14728222.12.7.905)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC2570709/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18554157/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Expert%20Opin.%20Ther.%20Targets&title=Rogue%20proliferation%20versus%20restorative%20protection:%20Where%20do%20we%20draw%20the%20line%20for%20wnt%20and%20forkhead%20signaling?&author=K.%20Maiese&author=Z.Z.%20Chong&author=Y.C.%20Shang&author=J.%20Hou&volume=12&publication_year=2008&pages=905-916&pmid=18554157&doi=10.1517/14728222.12.7.905&)]
  * 41.Turner R.T., Iwaniec U.T., Wong C.P., Lindenmaier L.B., Wagner L.A., Branscum A.J., Menn S.A., Taylor J., Zhang Y., Wu H., et al. Acute exposure to high dose gamma-radiation results in transient activation of bone lining cells. Bone. 2013;57:164–173. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2013.08.002. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2013.08.002)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4042434/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23954507/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Acute%20exposure%20to%20high%20dose%20gamma-radiation%20results%20in%20transient%20activation%20of%20bone%20lining%20cells&author=R.T.%20Turner&author=U.T.%20Iwaniec&author=C.P.%20Wong&author=L.B.%20Lindenmaier&author=L.A.%20Wagner&volume=57&publication_year=2013&pages=164-173&pmid=23954507&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2013.08.002&)]
  * 42.Green D.E., Adler B.J., Chan M.E., Rubin C.T. Devastation of adult stem cell pools by irradiation precedes collapse of trabecular bone quality and quantity. J. Bone Miner. Res. 2012;27:749. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1505. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.1505)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22190044/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Bone%20Miner.%20Res.&title=Devastation%20of%20adult%20stem%20cell%20pools%20by%20irradiation%20precedes%20collapse%20of%20trabecular%20bone%20quality%20and%20quantity&author=D.E.%20Green&author=B.J.%20Adler&author=M.E.%20Chan&author=C.T.%20Rubin&volume=27&publication_year=2012&pages=749&pmid=22190044&doi=10.1002/jbmr.1505&)]
  * 43.Cao X., Wu X., Frassica D., Yu B., Pang L., Xian L., Wan M., Lei W., Armour M., Tryggestad E., et al. Irradiation induces bone injury by damaging bone marrow microenvironment for stem cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2011;108:1609–1614. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1015350108. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1015350108)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC3029740/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21220327/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc.%20Natl.%20Acad.%20Sci.%20USA&title=Irradiation%20induces%20bone%20injury%20by%20damaging%20bone%20marrow%20microenvironment%20for%20stem%20cells&author=X.%20Cao&author=X.%20Wu&author=D.%20Frassica&author=B.%20Yu&author=L.%20Pang&volume=108&publication_year=2011&pages=1609-1614&pmid=21220327&doi=10.1073/pnas.1015350108&)]
  * 44.Alwood J.S., Yumoto K., Mojarrab R., Limoli C.L., Almeida E.A., Searby N.D., Globus R.K. Heavy ion irradiation and unloading effects on mouse lumbar vertebral microarchitecture, mechanical properties and tissue stresses. Bone. 2010;47:248–255. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2010.05.004. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2010.05.004)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20466089/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Heavy%20ion%20irradiation%20and%20unloading%20effects%20on%20mouse%20lumbar%20vertebral%20microarchitecture,%20mechanical%20properties%20and%20tissue%20stresses&author=J.S.%20Alwood&author=K.%20Yumoto&author=R.%20Mojarrab&author=C.L.%20Limoli&author=E.A.%20Almeida&volume=47&publication_year=2010&pages=248-255&pmid=20466089&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2010.05.004&)]
  * 45.Cao J.J., Wronski T.J., Iwaniec U., Phleger L., Kurimoto P., Boudignon B., Halloran B.P. Aging increases stromal/osteoblastic cell-induced osteoclastogenesis and alters the osteoclast precursor pool in the mouse. J. Bone Miner. Res. 2005;20:1659–1668. doi: 10.1359/JBMR.050503. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1359/JBMR.050503)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16059637/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Bone%20Miner.%20Res.&title=Aging%20increases%20stromal/osteoblastic%20cell-induced%20osteoclastogenesis%20and%20alters%20the%20osteoclast%20precursor%20pool%20in%20the%20mouse&author=J.J.%20Cao&author=T.J.%20Wronski&author=U.%20Iwaniec&author=L.%20Phleger&author=P.%20Kurimoto&volume=20&publication_year=2005&pages=1659-1668&pmid=16059637&doi=10.1359/JBMR.050503&)]
  * 46.Alwood J.S., Kumar A., Tran L.H., Wang A., Limoli C.L., Globus R.K. Low-dose, ionizing radiation and age-related changes in skeletal microarchitecture. J. Aging Res. 2012;2012:481983. doi: 10.1155/2012/481983. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/481983)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC3337602/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22570786/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Aging%20Res.&title=Low-dose,%20ionizing%20radiation%20and%20age-related%20changes%20in%20skeletal%20microarchitecture&author=J.S.%20Alwood&author=A.%20Kumar&author=L.H.%20Tran&author=A.%20Wang&author=C.L.%20Limoli&volume=2012&publication_year=2012&pages=481983&pmid=22570786&doi=10.1155/2012/481983&)]
  * 47.Oest M.E., Franken V., Kuchera T., Strauss J., Damron T.A. Long-term loss of osteoclasts and unopposed cortical mineral apposition following limited field irradiation. J. Orthop. Res. 2015;33:334–342. doi: 10.1002/jor.22761. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/jor.22761)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4382807/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25408493/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Orthop.%20Res.&title=Long-term%20loss%20of%20osteoclasts%20and%20unopposed%20cortical%20mineral%20apposition%20following%20limited%20field%20irradiation&author=M.E.%20Oest&author=V.%20Franken&author=T.%20Kuchera&author=J.%20Strauss&author=T.A.%20Damron&volume=33&publication_year=2015&pages=334-342&pmid=25408493&doi=10.1002/jor.22761&)]
  * 48.Lloyd S.A., Bandstra E.R., Travis N.D., Nelson G.A., Bourland J.D., Pecaut M.J., Gridley D.S., Willey J.S., Bateman T.A. Spaceflight-relevant types of ionizing radiation and cortical bone: Potential let effect? Adv. Space Res. 2008;42:1889–1897. doi: 10.1016/j.asr.2008.08.006. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asr.2008.08.006)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC2603056/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19122806/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Adv.%20Space%20Res.&title=Spaceflight-relevant%20types%20of%20ionizing%20radiation%20and%20cortical%20bone:%20Potential%20let%20effect?&author=S.A.%20Lloyd&author=E.R.%20Bandstra&author=N.D.%20Travis&author=G.A.%20Nelson&author=J.D.%20Bourland&volume=42&publication_year=2008&pages=1889-1897&pmid=19122806&doi=10.1016/j.asr.2008.08.006&)]
  * 49.Hada M., Zhang Y., Feiveson A., Cucinotta F.A., Wu H. Association of inter- and intrachromosomal exchanges with the distribution of low- and high-let radiation-induced breaks in chromosomes. Radiat. Res. 2011;176:25–37. doi: 10.1667/RR2433.1. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR2433.1)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21466383/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res.&title=Association%20of%20inter-%20and%20intrachromosomal%20exchanges%20with%20the%20distribution%20of%20low-%20and%20high-let%20radiation-induced%20breaks%20in%20chromosomes&author=M.%20Hada&author=Y.%20Zhang&author=A.%20Feiveson&author=F.A.%20Cucinotta&author=H.%20Wu&volume=176&publication_year=2011&pages=25-37&pmid=21466383&doi=10.1667/RR2433.1&)]
  * 50.Mariotti L.G., Bertolotti A., Ranza E., Babini G., Ottolenghi A. Investigation of the mechanisms underpinning il-6 cytokine release in bystander responses: The roles of radiation dose, radiation quality and specific ros/rns scavengers. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 2012;88:751–762. doi: 10.3109/09553002.2012.703365. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3109/09553002.2012.703365)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22709338/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Radiat.%20Biol.&title=Investigation%20of%20the%20mechanisms%20underpinning%20il-6%20cytokine%20release%20in%20bystander%20responses:%20The%20roles%20of%20radiation%20dose,%20radiation%20quality%20and%20specific%20ros/rns%20scavengers&author=L.G.%20Mariotti&author=A.%20Bertolotti&author=E.%20Ranza&author=G.%20Babini&author=A.%20Ottolenghi&volume=88&publication_year=2012&pages=751-762&pmid=22709338&doi=10.3109/09553002.2012.703365&)]
  * 51.Werner E., Wang Y., Doetsch P.W. A single exposure to low- or high-let radiation induces persistent genomic damage in mouse epithelial cells in vitro and in lung tissue. Radiat. Res. 2017;188:373–380. doi: 10.1667/RR14685.1. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR14685.1)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28753066/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res.&title=A%20single%20exposure%20to%20low-%20or%20high-let%20radiation%20induces%20persistent%20genomic%20damage%20in%20mouse%20epithelial%20cells%20in%20vitro%20and%20in%20lung%20tissue&author=E.%20Werner&author=Y.%20Wang&author=P.W.%20Doetsch&volume=188&publication_year=2017&pages=373-380&pmid=28753066&doi=10.1667/RR14685.1&)]
  * 52.Kim K.A., Kook S.H., Song J.H., Lee J.C. A phenolic acid phenethyl urea derivative protects against irradiation-induced osteoblast damage by modulating intracellular redox state. J. Cell. Biochem. 2014;115:1877–1887. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24857. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcb.24857)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24905050/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Cell.%20Biochem.&title=A%20phenolic%20acid%20phenethyl%20urea%20derivative%20protects%20against%20irradiation-induced%20osteoblast%20damage%20by%20modulating%20intracellular%20redox%20state&author=K.A.%20Kim&author=S.H.%20Kook&author=J.H.%20Song&author=J.C.%20Lee&volume=115&publication_year=2014&pages=1877-1887&pmid=24905050&doi=10.1002/jcb.24857&)]
  * 53.Mi Choi E., Sik Suh K., Jung W.W., Young Park S., Ouk Chin S., Youl Rhee S., Kim Pak Y., Chon S. Actein alleviates 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-mediated cellular dysfunction in osteoblastic mc3t3-e1 cells. Environ. Toxicol. 2017 doi: 10.1002/tox.22459. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/tox.22459)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28836330/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Environ.%20Toxicol.&title=Actein%20alleviates%202,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-mediated%20cellular%20dysfunction%20in%20osteoblastic%20mc3t3-e1%20cells&author=E.%20Mi%20Choi&author=K.%20Sik%20Suh&author=W.W.%20Jung&author=S.%20Young%20Park&author=S.%20Ouk%20Chin&publication_year=2017&pmid=28836330&doi=10.1002/tox.22459&)]
  * 54.Mao X.W., Nishiyama N.C., Campbell-Beachler M., Gifford P., Haynes K.E., Gridley D.S., Pecaut M.J. Role of nadph oxidase as a mediator of oxidative damage in low-dose irradiated and hindlimb-unloaded mice. Radiat. Res. 2017;188:392–399. doi: 10.1667/RR14754.1. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR14754.1)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28763287/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res.&title=Role%20of%20nadph%20oxidase%20as%20a%20mediator%20of%20oxidative%20damage%20in%20low-dose%20irradiated%20and%20hindlimb-unloaded%20mice&author=X.W.%20Mao&author=N.C.%20Nishiyama&author=M.%20Campbell-Beachler&author=P.%20Gifford&author=K.E.%20Haynes&volume=188&publication_year=2017&pages=392-399&pmid=28763287&doi=10.1667/RR14754.1&)]
  * 55.Krause A.R., Speacht T.L., Zhang Y., Lang C.H., Donahue H.J. Simulated space radiation sensitizes bone but not muscle to the catabolic effects of mechanical unloading. PLoS ONE. 2017;12:e0182403. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0182403. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0182403)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC5540592/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28767703/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20ONE&title=Simulated%20space%20radiation%20sensitizes%20bone%20but%20not%20muscle%20to%20the%20catabolic%20effects%20of%20mechanical%20unloading&author=A.R.%20Krause&author=T.L.%20Speacht&author=Y.%20Zhang&author=C.H.%20Lang&author=H.J.%20Donahue&volume=12&publication_year=2017&pages=e0182403&pmid=28767703&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0182403&)]
  * 56.Shahnazari M., Dwyer D., Chu V., Asuncion F., Stolina M., Ominsky M., Kostenuik P., Halloran B. Bone turnover markers in peripheral blood and marrow plasma reflect trabecular bone loss but not endocortical expansion in aging mice. Bone. 2012;50:628–637. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2011.11.010. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2011.11.010)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22154841/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Bone%20turnover%20markers%20in%20peripheral%20blood%20and%20marrow%20plasma%20reflect%20trabecular%20bone%20loss%20but%20not%20endocortical%20expansion%20in%20aging%20mice&author=M.%20Shahnazari&author=D.%20Dwyer&author=V.%20Chu&author=F.%20Asuncion&author=M.%20Stolina&volume=50&publication_year=2012&pages=628-637&pmid=22154841&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2011.11.010&)]
  * 57.Bouxsein M.L., Boyd S.K., Christiansen B.A., Guldberg R.E., Jepsen K.J., Muller R. Guidelines for assessment of bone microstructure in rodents using micro-computed tomography. J. Bone Miner. Res. 2010;25:1468–1486. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.141. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.141)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20533309/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Bone%20Miner.%20Res.&title=Guidelines%20for%20assessment%20of%20bone%20microstructure%20in%20rodents%20using%20micro-computed%20tomography&author=M.L.%20Bouxsein&author=S.K.%20Boyd&author=B.A.%20Christiansen&author=R.E.%20Guldberg&author=K.J.%20Jepsen&volume=25&publication_year=2010&pages=1468-1486&pmid=20533309&doi=10.1002/jbmr.141&)]

* * *

Articles from International Journal of Molecular Sciences are provided here
courtesy of **Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute (MDPI)**

