Bone Rep

. 2018 Oct 27;9:165–172. doi:
[10.1016/j.bonr.2018.10.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bonr.2018.10.002)

  * [Search in PMC](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/search/?term=%22Bone%20Rep%22%5Bjour%5D)
  * [Search in PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Bone%20Rep%22%5Bjour%5D)
  * [View in NLM Catalog](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nlmcatalog?term=%22Bone%20Rep%22%5BTitle%20Abbreviation%5D)
  * [Add to search](?term=%22Bone%20Rep%22%5Bjour%5D)

# High-precision method for cyclic loading of small-animal vertebrae to assess
bone quality

[Megan M
Pendleton](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Pendleton%20MM%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Megan M Pendleton

aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA,
USA

Find articles by [Megan M
Pendleton](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Pendleton%20MM%22%5BAuthor%5D)

a, [Saghi
Sadoughi](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Sadoughi%20S%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Saghi Sadoughi

aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA,
USA

Find articles by [Saghi
Sadoughi](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Sadoughi%20S%22%5BAuthor%5D)

a, [Alfred Li](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Li%20A%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Alfred Li

bEndocrine Research Unit, University of California and Veteran Affairs Medical
Center, San Francisco, CA, USA

Find articles by [Alfred
Li](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Li%20A%22%5BAuthor%5D)

b, [Grace D
O'Connell](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22O'Connell%20GD%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Grace D O'Connell

aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA,
USA

cDepartment of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California, San Francisco,
CA, USA

Find articles by [Grace D
O'Connell](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22O'Connell%20GD%22%5BAuthor%5D)

a,c, [Joshua S
Alwood](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Alwood%20JS%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Joshua S Alwood

dSpace Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA

Find articles by [Joshua S
Alwood](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Alwood%20JS%22%5BAuthor%5D)

d, [Tony M
Keaveny](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Keaveny%20TM%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Tony M Keaveny

aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA,
USA

eDepartment of Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA

Find articles by [Tony M
Keaveny](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Keaveny%20TM%22%5BAuthor%5D)

a,e,⁎

  * Author information
  * Article notes
  * Copyright and License information

aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA,
USA

bEndocrine Research Unit, University of California and Veteran Affairs Medical
Center, San Francisco, CA, USA

cDepartment of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California, San Francisco,
CA, USA

dSpace Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA

eDepartment of Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA

⁎

Corresponding author at: 5124 Etcheverry Hall, Mailstop 1740, University of
California, Berkeley, CA 94720-1740, USA. tonykeaveny@berkeley.edu

Received 2018 Oct 9; Accepted 2018 Oct 17; Collection date 2018 Dec.

© 2018 Published by Elsevier Inc.

This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

[PMC Copyright notice](/about/copyright/)

PMCID: PMC6222041 PMID: [30417036](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30417036/)

## Abstract

One potentially important bone quality characteristic is the response of bone
to cyclic (repetitive) mechanical loading. In small animals, such as in rats
and mice, cyclic loading experiments are particularly challenging to perform
in a precise manner due to the small size of the bones and difficult-to-
eliminate machine compliance. Addressing this issue, we developed a precise
method for ex vivo cyclic compressive loading of isolated mouse vertebral
bodies. The method has three key characteristics: 3D-printed support jigs for
machining plano-parallel surfaces of the tiny vertebrae; pivotable loading
platens to ensure uniform contact and loading of specimen surfaces; and
specimen-specific micro-CT-based finite element analysis to measure stiffness
to prescribe force levels that produce the same specified level of strain for
all test specimens. To demonstrate utility, we measured fatigue life for three
groups (_n_ = 5–6 per group) of L5 vertebrae of C57BL/6J male mice, comparing
our new method against two methods commonly used in the literature. We found
reduced scatter of the mechanical behavior for this new method compared to the
literature methods. In particular, for a controlled level of strain, the
standard deviation of the measured fatigue life was up to 5-fold lower for the
new method (F-ratio = 4.9; _p_ < 0.01). The improved precision for this new
method for biomechanical testing of small-animal vertebrae may help elucidate
aspects of bone quality.

**Keywords:** Fatigue, Bone mechanics, Mouse, Vertebrae, Bone quality

## 1\. Introduction

A number of diseases, including osteoporosis (Bouxsein, 2003a; Saito and
Marumo, 2010) and type II diabetes (Janghorbani et al., 2007; Vestergaard,
2007; Farr and Khosla, 2016; Rubin and Patsch, 2016), are thought to increase
fracture risk due in part to deteriorated bone quality. That is, these
diseases may result in detrimental changes to mechanical behavior that are not
directly associated with reductions in bone mass (Hernandez and Keaveny,
2006). Concerns over possible changes in bone quality have also caused the FDA
to require extensive pre-clinical animal testing on any new treatments
(Mosekilde, 1995; Ominsky et al., 2011). In assessing bone quality, various
mechanical properties can be measured (Hernandez and Keaveny, 2006; Turner and
Burr, 1993; Fyhrie and Christiansen, 2015), typically stiffness, strength,
toughness, and ductility. All these properties are obtained from monotonic
loading. In addition, the response of bone to cyclic (repetitive) loading may
be important for bone quality assessment if such loading produces unique
failure mechanisms (e.g. slow crack growth, microdamage accumulation) that are
not manifested in monotonic loading (Kruzic and Ritchie, 2008; Nalla et al.,
2003). Biomechanical testing of any type is challenging to perform in a
precise manner in small animals, such as in rats and mice, due to the small
size of the bones and the inevitable machine-compliance effects that are
difficult to eliminate. Furthermore, for cyclic loading, loss of test
specimens during the experiment and the substantial variation in cyclic-
loading responses both serve to reduce statistical power (Brouwers et al.,
2009), which in turn can lead to inconclusive findings regarding the role of
bone quality.

As a result of these challenges, and because of the continuing interest in
bone quality (Bouxsein, 2003b; Seeman and Delmas, 2006), there remains a need
to refine the experimental protocols for biomechanical testing of small-animal
bone specimens, particularly for cyclic loading. Here, we report on a method
for cyclic biomechanical testing of the mouse lumbar vertebra ex vivo that has
improved precision. This technique should help optimize statistical power in
animal experiments, thus improving the ability of researchers to detect
mechanically relevant changes in bone quality due to aging, disease, or
treatment, particularly for any situation in which samples sizes are limited
in number.

## 2\. Materials and methods

We first present our new method in detail. Then, to demonstrate utility, we
describe results from cyclic testing experiments for three groups (_n_ = 5–6
per group) of L5 mouse vertebrae, comparing results for our new method
(referred to as “KFEA method”) against two existing methods from the
literature (referred to as “KEXP method” and “FMAX method”) (Brouwers et al.,
2009; Caler and Carter, 1989; Bowman et al., 1998; Haddock et al., 2004;
Lambers et al., 2013; McCubbrey et al., 1995).

### 2.1. Animals

Our experiments used L5 vertebrae obtained post-mortem from male C57BL/6J mice
(Jackson Labs, Sacramento, CA) that were in the control groups of various
previous studies (unpublished). All original studies, and this study, were
approved by NASA Ames Research Center (ARC) Animal Care & Use Committee, and
all experimental testing was conducted at NASA ARC. Ages of the mice ranged
from 15 to 18 weeks. After sacrifice, the L1-S1 spinal segment was excised
from the mouse with a scalpel via an anterior approach. The L5 vertebra was
then separated by slicing through the adjacent intervertebral discs, gently
cleaned of soft tissue, wrapped in saline-soaked gauze (Gibco PBS 1X, pH 7.4),
and stored at −20 °C until specimen preparation.

### 2.2. Specimen preparation

Obtaining true plano-parallel surfaces, which is difficult for such small
specimens (Brouwers et al., 2009), is important to ensure full contact — and
thus uniform compression — between the specimen surface and loading platens.
If plano-parallel surfaces are not achieved, or if the loading platens are not
perfectly parallel, local contact can occur over just part of the specimen
surface. This introduces unwanted scatter in the mechanical response and
perhaps also premature failure. Thus, we developed a detailed method for this
aspect of the specimen preparation (Fig. 1). Each vertebra was aligned inside
a 3D-printed (Stratasys Dimension SST 1200es, Eden Prairie, MN), disposable
jig with a metal pin (diameter range 0.91 to 0.99 mm; length of 38 mm) (Fig.
1A) and secured with polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA). The combined jig-bone
construct was then positioned in a diamond-saw microtome (Leica SP1600 Saw
Microtome, Wetzlar, Germany). Two parallel cuts were made on the cranial and
caudal surfaces under constant irrigation to remove only the endplates (Fig.
1B), preserving the maximum amount of bone tissue. A final cut through the
posterior pedicles released the vertebral body from the jig (Fig. 1C).

#### Fig. 1.

[![Fig.
1](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/830d/6222041/2bca73157dd2/gr1.jpg)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=6222041_gr1.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/f0005/)

Machining of a parallel-planed vertebral body. A: A 3D-printed, disposable,
plastic jig was designed to securely grip the specimen during machining. A
vertebra is placed into the jig using a snugly fit, metal alignment pin (gold)
through the vertebral foramen (pin diameter 0.9–1 mm) and sits in a diameter-
matched channel. The spinous process is oriented into the jig's shallow well,
which is then filled with PMMA (blue) to secure the vertebra. B: Once the PMMA
is set, the pin is removed and two plano-parallel cuts (red) through the
endplates are made using a diamond-saw microtome (not shown). C: A scalpel cut
(red) through the pedicles releases the planed vertebral body. In the top,
right corner an enlarged view of an L5 vertebrae and the cuts applied is
shown. Readers can download the stl via the supplemental material online. (For
interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader
is referred to the web version of this article.)

Machining of a parallel-planed vertebral body. A: A 3D-printed, disposable,
plastic jig was designed to securely grip the specimen during machining. A
vertebra is placed into the jig using a snugly fit, metal alignment pin (gold)
through the vertebral foramen (pin diameter 0.9–1 mm) and sits in a diameter-
matched channel. The spinous process is oriented into the jig's shallow well,
which is then filled with PMMA (blue) to secure the vertebra. B: Once the PMMA
is set, the pin is removed and two plano-parallel cuts (red) through the
endplates are made using a diamond-saw microtome (not shown). C: A scalpel cut
(red) through the pedicles releases the planed vertebral body. In the top,
right corner an enlarged view of an L5 vertebrae and the cuts applied is
shown. Readers can download the stl via the supplemental material online. (For
interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader
is referred to the web version of this article.)

### 2.3. Quantitative micro-CT imaging

After machining, specimens were imaged using quantitative micro-CT (μCT 50,
Scanco Medical AG, Bruttisellen, Switzerland) at a 10-μm voxel size (55 kV,
109 μA, 1000 projections per 180°, 500 ms integration time) (Fig. 2).
Specimens were returned to the freezer after imaging. The micro-CT images of
the whole specimen (cortical and trabecular compartments) were then analyzed
for height, minimum tissue cross-sectional area (minimum value of tissue area
at any cross-section, over all cross-sections), and total bone volume fraction
(BV/TV) (ImageJ 1.51h, Java 1.6.0). Each specimen with cortices removed was
then evaluated for trabecular micro-architecture (Scanco Evaluation Software
v6.0): trabecular bone volume fraction (Tb.BV/TV), number (Tb.N), thickness
(Tb.Th), and separation (Tb.Sp).

#### Fig. 2.

[![Fig.
2](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/830d/6222041/7885f437e4a1/gr2.jpg)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=6222041_gr2.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/f0010/)

Representative sample of a mouse vertebral body after all specimen
preparation. Cranial and caudal cross-sections shown at 10-μm voxel
resolution.

### 2.4. Calculating specimen-specific cyclic forces

We used a force-control loading protocol, which allows both creep and damage
to occur during cyclic loading. However, since the cyclic loading response of
bone appears to be determined by the magnitude of the applied _strain_ (as
opposed to the magnitude of stress) (Nalla et al., 2003; Keaveny et al.,
1994a; Keaveny et al., 1994b), our protocol required us to calculate a
specimen-specific level of applied force that would result in the same level
of initial apparent strain (calculated over the entire specimen) for all
specimens. Cyclic loading in force control in this way should minimize scatter
in the resulting fatigue life despite the heterogeneity in size, shape, and
microarchitecture of the mouse vertebrae.

This protocol required measuring the overall vertebral stiffness before
starting the cyclic loading so that the prescribed apparent strains (εmin and
εmax) could be converted into specimen-specific levels of applied force (Fmin
and Fmax). However, experimentally measuring stiffness for any bone is
challenging due to different types of machine compliance errors, which can
introduce both fixed and random errors (Odgaard et al., 1989; Odgaard and
Linde, 1991; Keaveny et al., 1993; Keaveny et al., 1997). The fixed errors
have implications for external validity, but otherwise do not compromise
comparisons within any given experiment and are therefore oftentimes
acceptable. However, large random errors compromise statistical power,
particularly when sample sizes are <10 per group. Thus, to circumvent any
errors associated with machine compliance, we used a computationally derived
stiffness (KFEA) that was obtained from specimen-specific, micro-CT-based,
linearly elastic, voxel-based finite element analysis. The models used 10-μm
sized cube voxels, and assumed a nominal value of 10 GPa for the tissue-level
(voxel) elastic modulus for all specimens (see Appendix A for details). The
specimen-specific cyclic forces (Fmin; Eq. 1 and Fmax; Eq. 2) were then
calculated for each specimen using KFEA, the specimen height (H) as measured
from micro-CT, and two assumed nominal values of initial apparent elastic
strain (εmin = 0.05% and εmax = 0.5%):

Fmin=KFEAHεmin | (1)  
---|---  
Fmax=KFEAHεmax | (2)  
---|---  
  
The assumed value of εmax = 0.5% was chosen empirically by trial and error
based on earlier preliminary experiments on 6 mouse vertebral specimens.
There, we found that the resulting Fmax value was approximately half of the
directly measured ultimate force, which generally placed a specimen in the
middle region of its fatigue life. The minimum initial elastic apparent strain
value was chosen such that the resulting Fmin values were near 1 N.

### 2.5. Mechanical testing

Within one week after imaging, specimens were thawed again to room temperature
and prepared for cyclic loading in uniaxial compression to failure. The
vertebral body was positioned onto the center of the lower platen of the
material testing device (TA ElectroForce 3200, Eden Prairie, MN). Because
obtaining perfectly parallel loading platens can be challenging, the upper
platen comprised a spherically-seated platen on a lubricated ball-bearing
which allows the platen surface to rotate and mate flush with the sample
surface to achieve uniform contact (Fig. 3); with the pre-load in place, the
set screws on the upper platen are locked. We used a compressive pre-load of 1
N, and after the platen was locked room-temperature saline-solution (Gibco PBS
1X, pH 7.4) was added to the bath until the specimen was fully submerged. The
pre-load was then adjusted to the predetermined Fmin, and then sinusoidal
cycles of compression between Fmin and Fmax were applied at a frequency of 8
Hz until the specimen reached 10% strain, measured via the actuation of the
testing device platens.

#### Fig. 3.

[![Fig.
3](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/830d/6222041/f0d389f86cf0/gr3.jpg)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=6222041_gr3.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/f0015/)

Experimental test set-up for fatigue test shown with spherically-seated upper
platen and specimen after preparation.

### 2.6. Outcome measurements

Three plots were produced from each specimen fatigue test to define outcome
measurements. First, the force-displacement data were plotted for each
loading-unloading cycle, from which stiffness was defined as the secant
stiffness, or range of force divided by range of displacement per cycle (Fig.
4A). Second, the apparent strain per cycle was plotted, and was separated into
three curves representing total strain, creep strain, and damage strain (Fig.
4B). The total-strain curve was used to find the number of cycles to failure,
or fatigue life (Nf) and strain to failure (εf) using the point of
intersection between the curve and a 0.5% line offset parallel to a line of
best fit for the secondary region (Brouwers et al., 2009; Bowman et al.,
1998). Third, we plotted stiffness per cycle (Fig. 4C) to identify three
variables: elastic stiffness of the specimen (Kelastic), stiffness at failure
(Kf), and rate of stiffness degradation. Elastic stiffness was calculated as
the average stiffness over ±500 cycles centered about the maximum value of
stiffness (Kmax), which typically occurred after a few thousand cycles of
loading; the stiffness at failure was defined as the stiffness measured at
cycle Nf; and the rate of stiffness degradation (ΔK/ΔN) was calculated as the
slope of a line that best fit the middle 50% of points in the range between
Kmax and Kf. The ΔK/ΔN parameter reflected accumulation of fatigue damage,
larger values indicating a more rapid accumulation of fatigue damage per
loading cycle.

#### Fig. 4.

[![Fig.
4](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/830d/6222041/e6cca26cb83e/gr4.jpg)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=6222041_gr4.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/f0020/)

Three plots generated from fatigue testing of a specimen. A: Force-
displacement shown for three cycles as the test progresses; an early cycle,
the cycle of maximum stiffness (dmax is displacement of this cycle), and the
cycle defined as failure (df is displacement of this cycle). B: Strain per
cycle was plotted for total strain, creep strain, and damage strain (Haddock
et al., 2004). Damage strain was only plotted from the cycle at which
stiffness was the greatest (Nmax) and began to decline. Fatigue life, Nf, and
strain to failure, εf, are found from the total strain curve (Bowman et al.,
1998). C: Stiffness per cycle displaying the maximum stiffness, Kmax, from
which Kelastic was calculated, and stiffness at failure, Kf. The rate of
stiffness degradation is the slope of the solid red line. (For interpretation
of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to
the web version of this article.)

In addition to these fatigue parameters, we also calculated an effective
elastic tissue modulus (Etissue, in GPa, Eq. 3). This was calculated using
both the experimental (Kelastic) and computational (KFEA) assessments of
stiffness, scaling with respect to the assumed nominal value of the tissue-
level modulus of 10 GPa in the finite element analysis:

Etissue=10KelasticKFEA | (3)  
---|---  
  
### 2.7. Alternative methods for calculating specimen-specific cyclic forces

Two published methods were also implemented to demonstrate utility of the new
method. For the first “KEXP method” (Brouwers et al., 2009; Caler and Carter,
1989; Bowman et al., 1998; Haddock et al., 2004; Lambers et al., 2013),
instead of using the finite element-derived value of stiffness (KFEA), the
experimental measurement KEXP was used. Following literature protocol, KEXP
was found by pre-loading the specimen in compression to 1 N, cycling between 1
and 10 N 20 times, and using the slope from the force-displacement curve of
the 20th cycle. All other mechanical testing details were the same as for our
new method except for two differences in the KEXP method: 1) the upper platen
used was a rigid design (not adjustable); and 2) the cyclic frequency was 2
Hz. However, fatigue behavior of bone has been shown to be unaltered for any
loading frequency below 15 Hz (Lafferty, 1978; Yamamoto et al., 2006).

For the second “FMAX method” (McCubbrey et al., 1995), Fmax was calculated
using the measured strength of the adjacent L4 vertebra, obtained by monotonic
compression to failure. The L5 strength was estimated as the product of the L4
strength and the ratio of minimum tissue cross-sectional areas (micro-CT) for
the L4 and L5 vertebrae, and Fmax was then calculated as 50% of the L5 force
(See Appendix B, Table 2 for further details). All other mechanical testing
details were the same as our new method.

### 2.8. Statistical analysis

The means and standard deviations of all outcome measurements were compared
between the new method versus the two literature methods. To compare means, a
one-way ANOVA was conducted, with a Tukey-Kramer _post-hoc_ test applied to
evaluate significant differences (at _p_ ≤ 0.05). To compare standard
deviations, a Bartlett test was conducted. Standard deviations were considered
significantly different with a F-ratio >1.0 and _p_ ≤ 0.05. Also, linear
regression was used to compare the relationships between maximum cyclic
loading force and log of fatigue life (equivalent to a traditional S-N fatigue
curve) between the three methods. All statistics were performed using JMP
(v13.0, SAS Institute).

## 3\. Results

Of all three methods tested, the new (KFEA) method produced the lowest
variation in fatigue life. The mean value of the applied force was the same
for all groups (22 N), but the standard deviation was lowest for the new
(KFEA) method (±0.77 N), 8-fold and 7-fold lower than the KEXP and FMAX
methods (F-ratio = 5.5; _p_ < 0.01; Fig. 5A), respectively. Because of these
larger variations in applied force for the literature methods, the fatigue
life displayed a negative S-N type relation with the loading force (R2 = 0.73
both literature methods) but there was no such correlation for the new method
(R2 = 0.07; Fig. 6). Instead, for the new method the fatigue life was
approximately uniform across all specimens (5.0 ± 0.2), and its standard
deviation was 5-fold and 2-fold lower than for the KEXP or FMAX methods,
respectively (F-ratio = 4.9; _p_ = 0.008; Fig. 5A).

### Fig. 5.

[![Fig.
5](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/830d/6222041/3a26402378ef/gr5.jpg)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=6222041_gr5.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/f0025/)

A: Specimen-specific cyclic loading force and number of cycles to failure, or
fatigue life for each method. Error bars represent standard deviations.
Standard deviation of the cyclic loading force was significantly lower for the
KFEA method compared to both other methods (_p_ < 0.01). Standard deviation of
the fatigue life was significantly lower for the KFEA method compared to both
other methods (_p_ < 0.01). The mean value for cyclic loading force was the
same for all methods. The mean value for cycles to failure for FMAX and KFEA
were the same, however cycles to failure for KEXP was lower compared to these
methods (_p_ < 0.01). B: Average elastic stiffness, measured experimentally,
of the vertebra for each method. Error bars represent ±1 standard deviation.
The KEXP method stiffness was significantly lower (_p_ < 0.01) compared to the
FMAX and KFEA methods.

### Fig. 6.

![Fig.
6](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/830d/6222041/f27a9c70e8c9/gr6.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/f0030/)

Applied force versus cycles to failure for the three methods. Two different
F-N responses were found for the literature methods; by contrast, fatigue life
was approximately constant for the new method. _p_ < 0.05 for regression.

The new method also provided other measurements related to bone quality, both
of which displayed high uniformity across the specimens: the effective tissue
elastic modulus, Etissue, was 5.83 ± 0.22 GPa and the strain to (cyclic)
failure, εf, was 3.20 ± 0.80%.

Three additional observations were noteworthy. First, compared to the new
method, the average fatigue life was lower for the KEXP method by 40.9% (_p_ =
0.002) whereas fatigue life did not differ for the FMAX method (_p_ > 0.90;
Fig. 5A). Second, the elastic stiffness measured from fatigue testing
(Kelastic) was also lower for the KEXP method than the FMAX method by 42.1%
(_p_ = 0.002), and than the new method by 44.8% (_p_ < 0.001); stiffnesses for
the FMAX and new methods were not different (_p_ > 0.80; Fig. 5B). And third,
the standard deviation for stiffness was lowest for the new method (F-ratio =
4.53; _p_ = 0.011; Fig. 5B) compared to the KEXP and FMAX method. The
difference in stiffness variation between FMAX and the new method, which both
used the spherically-seated platen, shows that large variations in stiffness
can still exist even with the use of a pivotable fixture, presumably due to
variable degrees of machine compliance.

## 4\. Discussion

Our new method for cyclic loading of small-animal vertebrae yielded highly
reproducible measurements of fatigue life and was successful, in part, by
effectively controlling for the nominal level of strain applied to these tiny
bone specimens. Failure of bone in both static and fatigue loading is largely
thought to be strain-controlled (Nalla et al., 2003; Bowman et al., 1998;
Keaveny et al., 2001; Keaveny et al., 1994c; Schileo et al., 2008). To apply a
repeatable initial strain to each specimen, a consistent measurement of
stiffness must first be obtained. Our new method utilized specimen-specific
micro-CT-based finite element analyses to measure specimen stiffness and
prescribe an individualized cyclic force for each specimen. In turn, these
individualized forces resulted in a consistent starting level of strain
applied to all test specimens, and resulted in similar values of fatigue life.
By contrast, our implementations of the two literature methods were unable to
consistently apply the specified starting strain value, which produced more
scatter in the magnitude of the applied forces and an unintended S-N-like
relationship. The reduced level of scatter in fatigue life using this method
would be particularly helpful for studies limited to a small sample size, such
as in vivo animal experiments, to improve detection in cyclic properties.

The consistency of our strain-to-failure results with those from other studies
supports the validity of our new approach. While the fatigue life will depend
on the level of loading, strain-to-failure is emerging as a more uniform
outcome across many different cyclic loading experiments. Our strain-to-
failure (mean ± SD) value of 3.20 ± 0.80%, from cyclic compression testing of
mouse vertebrae, is consistent with cyclic compression results for other
species: 3.36 ± 2.13% for human trabecular bone (Haddock et al., 2004), 2.85%
± 0.66% for bovine trabecular bone (Bowman et al., 1998), and 4.19 ± 1.52% for
rat whole-bone vertebra (Brouwers et al., 2009). A similar value in cyclic
compressive strain-to-failure between these studies and ours might be expected
for two reasons. First, the bone material, primarily the collagen component
which dominates the plasticity and therefore strain-to-failure of the bone
(Burstein et al., 1975), is similar amongst the species listed. And second,
others have reported on relatively uniform values for the strain-to-failure
independent of apparent density, applied loads, or temperature (Bowman et al.,
1998; Keaveny et al., 2001; Keaveny et al., 1994c). While the absolute value
of strain to failure will be influenced by any machine compliance, the general
level of agreement and small degree of scatter suggests that bone tissue does
indeed fail at a narrow range of strain under cyclic loading, and that our
protocol was successful in reducing the variation in strain across different
specimens.

Our findings also indicate that implementing a pivotable loading platen to
ensure uniform contact is important for accuracy of results, at least for
these small-animal bones. We observed a reduced Kelastic and fatigue life for
the KEXP method compared to the new method, even though the specimens used in
both protocols had similar size and microarchitecture (Appendix B; Table 1).
We attribute these inconsistent results to the rigid platen design used in the
KEXP method testing. Even with rigorous specimen preparation in place, we
found that perfectly plano-parallel loading surfaces on small bones cannot
always be achieved. And without an adjustable platen, the load can be
localized to an area that comes into contact with the platen first, producing
an effective stress concentration. This localized load can result in reduced
stiffness and the stress concentration in reduced fatigue life.

There are some limitations to this study. First, the bone tissue used in this
study was shared tissue, which did not allow for random assignment of animals
across all groups, and thus it is possible specimens differed across groups.
However, the similarity in size and structure of specimen across all groups as
per micro-CT analysis (Appendix B; Table 1) suggests the only source of
appreciable heterogeneity could be in tissue material properties, which is
unlikely because the animals were of the same strain, sex, and approximate
age. Second, the initial strain values of (εmax = 0.5%) used for our new
method may be specific to this particular protocol, which assumed an effective
tissue modulus of 10 GPa in the finite element analyses. The assumed value was
chosen empirically by trial and error on some preliminary test specimens, such
that the resulting Fmax values were approximately half of the directly
measured ultimate force. To use this method in other animal models, large or
small (e.g. rat, bovine, monkey), similar preliminary testing to determine the
value of εmax is suggested, particularly if it is suspected that the effective
tissue modulus might differ from mouse vertebrae. We recommend using an
elastic strain level that is associated with about half of the ultimate
strength. Third, the values of the effective tissue elastic modulus reported
here are specific to this experiment. Parameters such as temperature, loading
frequency, and use of different platens, can all contribute to machine
compliance and variation between tests, thus the effective tissue modulus
should not be considered a true material property. Placing an extensometer
across the platens directly beside the specimen ends can minimize machine
compliance effects. However, it is best to use the effective tissue modulus as
a relative measurement to compare between untreated and treated specimens
within an experiment, but not across studies (e.g. between mouse and rat
bones). Lastly, as with any laboratory-based biomechanical testing, the
loading configuration does not mimic exact in vivo conditions. Our removal of
the endplate and loading via a rigid platen versus loading via intact disc and
endplate is a clear limitation. Thus, while our results do not describe
expected in vivo behavior, our protocol does produce highly repeatable
results, which should help elucidate changes in bone quality characteristics
by aging, disease, or treatment.

The main application of our new method is to provide greater statistical power
in using small-animal experiments to mechanically assess relevant aspects of
bone quality associated with aging, disease, or treatment. A small sample size
and scatter associated with the fatigue testing present challenges for
detecting statistically significant effects unless those effects are large.
For example, Brouwers et al. (Brouwers et al., 2009) found a 37.5% difference
in steady-state creep rate and 15.7% difference in loss of stiffness with
zoledronate treatment in an osteoporotic rat model, but could not report a
detectable significance due to high variation in the data and loss of some
samples. Our KEXP method was similar to their method, which produced standard
deviations in fatigue life (reported as “time-to-failure”) up to the same
magnitude as the mean value. Our new method should reduce that range up to
8-fold. Furthermore, unlike in the Brouwers literature protocol, we had no
loss of specimens, enabled by repeatable specimen preparation (e.g. 3D-printed
support jigs for machining plano-parallel surfaces) and uniform loading of
specimen surfaces (e.g. spherically-seated platen), which further improves
statistical power, and can be implemented for monotonic testing or fatigue
testing of small-animal vertebrae. That said, our new method is a time
intensive process for specimen preparation, micro-CT, image processing, and
finite element analysis. However, the extra effort improves the ability to
detect small differences across treatment groups without using a large number
of animals, which is advantageous both ethically and also logistically when
sample sizes are inherently limited (e.g. space flight experiments). Thus, use
of our new method may improve the ability of future studies to elucidate
mechanically relevant aspects of bone quality associated with aging, disease,
or treatment.

The following are the supplementary data related to this article.

Supplementary material

[mmc1.zip](/articles/instance/6222041/bin/mmc1.zip) (9.3KB, zip)

## Acknowledgments

### Acknowledgements

This research was supported by a NASA Science and Technology Research
Fellowship (NSTRF) NNX14AM56H to MMP, and guidance from NSTRF research
collaborator, Dr. Jean D. Sibonga. Additional experimental resources were
provided through NASA Space Biology PECASE to JSA. Computational resources
were made available through the National Science Foundation via XSEDE, Grant
TG-MCA00N019 to TMK. We also thank Shannon Emerzian and Ryan Scott for help
with specimen preparation.

### Conflicts of interest

All authors certify that there are no conflicts of interest related to the
work presented in this manuscript.

## Appendix A. Image processing

Image processing of the original micro-CT images was conducted prior to finite
element analysis for each specimen. First, the image stack was reoriented to
align the specimen with the z-axis (DataViewer v1.5.2.4, Bruker). Second, the
reoriented images were thresholded using the ‘Default’ Autothreshold algorithm
in ImageJ (ImageJ 1.51h, Java 1.6.0_24). The final stack was used to build the
finite element model.

### A.1. Finite element analysis

To determine the computational stiffness, high-resolution linear finite
element analysis was performed. Each 10-μm cubic voxel in the images was
converted into an eight-noded brick element to create a finite element model
of the entire vertebral body. All bone elements were assigned the same
elastic, homogeneous and isotropic material properties: elastic modulus 10 GPa
and Poisson's ratio of 0.3. These values are based on experimental testing of
core samples of trabecular bone from human vertebrae (Bevill and Keaveny,
2009). A varied modulus based on tissue mineral density and thus micro-CT
greyscale was not used in this methodology due to underestimation of apparent
modulus using this approach (Kaynia et al., 2015). Each model was uniaxially
compressed to 2% apparent strain, the input was displacement which varied
depending on specimen height. Typical models contained approximately 1.5
million elements and were solved using a highly scalable, implicit parallel
finite-element framework Olympus (Adams et al., 2004) running on a Dell Linux
Cluster supercomputer (Stampede, Texas Advanced Computing Center). The outcome
was the whole-bone reaction force, which was then used to calculate
computational stiffness, KFEA (Eq. 4), by dividing by the input displacement.

KFEA=Reaction forceInput displacement | (4)  
---|---  
  
## Appendix B.

### Table 1.

The KEXP and KFEA method specimen structural parameters indicate there were no
significant differences in specimen size and shape. There were also no
significant differences in the mean or standard deviations (F-ratio = 1.65;
_p_ = 0.20) of computed cyclic force between these two groups. The computed
cyclic loading force for KEXP group was retrospectively found to demonstrate
the difference in standard deviation of cyclic loading force computed with the
KEXP method compared to KFEA method (F-ratio = 10.9; _p_ < 0.01). The
structural parameters from specimens of the FMAX method are not compared to
KEXP and FMAX method groups because of a difference in resolution of these
micro-CT scans (20.7 μm). However, the stiffness and fatigue life measurements
are the same for the FMAX and KFEA methods, which suggest the structural
parameters for the FMAX method specimens were similar to those used in the
KEXP and KFEA methods.

Measure | KEXP (_n_ = 6) | KFEA (_n_ = 5) | _p_  
---|---|---|---  
Min tissue area (mm2) | 0.97 ± 0.19 | 0.96 ± 0.09 | 0.92  
Avg tissue area (mm2) | 1.71 ± 0.33 | 1.59 ± 0.11 | 0.47  
BV/TV (%) | 34.0 ± 1.00 | 33.0 ± 1.00 | 0.08  
Tb.BV/TV (%) | 22.0 ± 3.00 | 23.0 ± 1.00 | 0.83  
Tb.N (1/mm) | 4.94 ± 0.42 | 5.30 ± 0.32 | 0.15  
Tb.Th (μm) | 47.1 ± 3.26 | 44.5 ± 2.58 | 0.19  
Tb.Sp (μm) | 198 ± 17.8 | 185 ± 14.1 | 0.24  
Computed cyclic loading force (N) | 20.9 ± 1.54 | 21.2 ± 0.78 | 0.73  
Cyclic loading force (N) | 22.5 ± 6.78 | 21.2 ± 0.78 | 0.68  
Mean ± SD |  |  |   
  
[Open in a new tab](table/t0005/)

### Table 2.

Structural parameters and resulting forces and fatigue life for L4 and L5
vertebrae used in testing the “FMAX method”. Max Stress is calculated from the
resulting maximum force found from monotonic testing of the L4 (i.e. σ =
FL4/AL4). This maximum stress is a material property and assumed to be the
same for the adjacent L5 bone. The cyclic loading force applied to the L5 was
derived from this stress (i.e. Fapplied = 0.5(σ)(AL5)), labeled “50% of L5 Max
Force” in the table. The range in applied force calculated led to a larger
standard deviation in fatigue life when compared to the new method KFEA.

Specimens (L4 or L5) | L4 Min Tissue Area (mm2) | L4 Max Force (N) | Max Stress (MPa) | L5 Min Tissue Area (mm2) | 50% of L5 Max Force (N) | L5 Nf  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
DX.2 | 1.69 | 44.1 | 26.1 | 1.36 | 17.8 | 374,418  
DX.3 | 1.42 | 50.2 | 35.3 | 1.75 | 30.9 | 46,516  
DX.5 | 1.23 | 37.5 | 30.5 | 1.18 | 18.0 | 476,045  
DX.6 | 2.33 | 47.3 | 20.3 | 1.92 | 19.5 | 172,800  
DX.7 | 1.58 | 65.5 | 41.4 | 1.29 | 26.7 | 98,217  
Mean ± SD | 1.65 ± 0.4 | 48.9 ± 9.3 | 30.7 ± 7.3 | 1.50 ± 0.3 | 22.6 ± 5.3 | 233,600 ± 164,700  
  
[Open in a new tab](table/t0010/)

## References

  1. Adams M.F., Bayraktar H.H., Keaveny T.M., Papadopoulos P. Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE SC2004 Conference. IEEE; 2004. Ultrascalable implicit finite element analyses in solid mechanics with over a half a billion degrees of freedom, supercomputing, 2004; p. 34. [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Proceedings%20of%20the%20ACM/IEEE%20SC2004%20Conference&author=M.F.%20Adams&author=H.H.%20Bayraktar&author=T.M.%20Keaveny&author=P.%20Papadopoulos&publication_year=2004&)]
  2. Bevill G., Keaveny T.M. Trabecular bone strength predictions using finite element analysis of micro-scale images at limited spatial resolution. Bone. 2009;44(4):579–584. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2008.11.020. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2008.11.020)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19135184/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Trabecular%20bone%20strength%20predictions%20using%20finite%20element%20analysis%20of%20micro-scale%20images%20at%20limited%20spatial%20resolution&author=G.%20Bevill&author=T.M.%20Keaveny&volume=44&issue=4&publication_year=2009&pages=579-584&pmid=19135184&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2008.11.020&)]
  3. Bouxsein M.L. Mechanisms of osteoporosis therapy: a bone strength perspective. Clin. Cornerstone. 2003;(Suppl. 2):S13–S21. doi: 10.1016/s1098-3597(03)90043-3. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1098-3597\(03\)90043-3)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15035555/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20Cornerstone&title=Mechanisms%20of%20osteoporosis%20therapy:%20a%20bone%20strength%20perspective&author=M.L.%20Bouxsein&issue=Suppl.%202&publication_year=2003&pages=S13-S21&pmid=15035555&doi=10.1016/s1098-3597\(03\)90043-3&)]
  4. Bouxsein M.L. Bone quality: where do we go from here? Osteoporos. Int. 2003;14(Suppl. 5):S118–S127. doi: 10.1007/s00198-003-1489-x. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-003-1489-x)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14504716/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Osteoporos.%20Int.&title=Bone%20quality:%20where%20do%20we%20go%20from%20here?&author=M.L.%20Bouxsein&volume=14&issue=Suppl.%205&publication_year=2003&pages=S118-S127&pmid=14504716&doi=10.1007/s00198-003-1489-x&)]
  5. Bowman S.M., Guo X.E., Cheng D.W., Keaveny T.M., Gibson L.J., Hayes W.C., McMahon T.A. Creep contributes to the fatigue behavior of bovine trabecular bone. J. Biomech. Eng. 1998;120(5):647–654. doi: 10.1115/1.2834757. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2834757)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10412444/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biomech.%20Eng.&title=Creep%20contributes%20to%20the%20fatigue%20behavior%20of%20bovine%20trabecular%20bone&author=S.M.%20Bowman&author=X.E.%20Guo&author=D.W.%20Cheng&author=T.M.%20Keaveny&author=L.J.%20Gibson&volume=120&issue=5&publication_year=1998&pages=647-654&pmid=10412444&doi=10.1115/1.2834757&)]
  6. Brouwers J.E., Ruchelsman M., Rietbergen B., Bouxsein M.L. Determination of rat vertebral bone compressive fatigue properties in untreated intact rats and zoledronic-acid-treated, ovariectomized rats. Osteoporos. Int. 2009;20(8):1377–1384. doi: 10.1007/s00198-008-0803-z. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-008-0803-z)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC2708332/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19066708/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Osteoporos.%20Int.&title=Determination%20of%20rat%20vertebral%20bone%20compressive%20fatigue%20properties%20in%20untreated%20intact%20rats%20and%20zoledronic-acid-treated,%20ovariectomized%20rats&author=J.E.%20Brouwers&author=M.%20Ruchelsman&author=B.%20Rietbergen&author=M.L.%20Bouxsein&volume=20&issue=8&publication_year=2009&pages=1377-1384&pmid=19066708&doi=10.1007/s00198-008-0803-z&)]
  7. Burstein A.H., Zika J.M., Heiple K.G., Klein L. Contribution of collagen and mineral to the elastic-plastic properties of bone. J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 1975;57(7):956–961. [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1184645/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Bone%20Joint%20Surg.%20Am.&title=Contribution%20of%20collagen%20and%20mineral%20to%20the%20elastic-plastic%20properties%20of%20bone&author=A.H.%20Burstein&author=J.M.%20Zika&author=K.G.%20Heiple&author=L.%20Klein&volume=57&issue=7&publication_year=1975&pages=956-961&pmid=1184645&)]
  8. Caler W.E., Carter D.R. Bone creep-fatigue damage accumulation. J. Biomech. 1989;22(6–7):625–635. doi: 10.1016/0021-9290(89)90013-4. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-9290\(89\)90013-4)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2808445/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biomech.&title=Bone%20creep-fatigue%20damage%20accumulation&author=W.E.%20Caler&author=D.R.%20Carter&volume=22&issue=6%E2%80%937&publication_year=1989&pages=625-635&pmid=2808445&doi=10.1016/0021-9290\(89\)90013-4&)]
  9. Farr J.N., Khosla S. Determinants of bone strength and quality in diabetes mellitus in humans. Bone. 2016;82:28–34. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.07.027. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2015.07.027)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4679576/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26211989/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Determinants%20of%20bone%20strength%20and%20quality%20in%20diabetes%20mellitus%20in%20humans&author=J.N.%20Farr&author=S.%20Khosla&volume=82&publication_year=2016&pages=28-34&pmid=26211989&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2015.07.027&)]
  10. Fyhrie D.P., Christiansen B.A. Bone material properties and skeletal fragility. Calcif. Tissue Int. 2015;97(3):213–228. doi: 10.1007/s00223-015-9997-1. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00223-015-9997-1)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25939648/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Calcif.%20Tissue%20Int.&title=Bone%20material%20properties%20and%20skeletal%20fragility&author=D.P.%20Fyhrie&author=B.A.%20Christiansen&volume=97&issue=3&publication_year=2015&pages=213-228&pmid=25939648&doi=10.1007/s00223-015-9997-1&)]
  11. Haddock S.M., Yeh O.C., Mummaneni P.V., Rosenberg W.S., Keaveny T.M. Similarity in the fatigue behavior of trabecular bone across site and species. J. Biomech. 2004;37(2):181–187. doi: 10.1016/s0021-9290(03)00245-8. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0021-9290\(03\)00245-8)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14706320/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biomech.&title=Similarity%20in%20the%20fatigue%20behavior%20of%20trabecular%20bone%20across%20site%20and%20species&author=S.M.%20Haddock&author=O.C.%20Yeh&author=P.V.%20Mummaneni&author=W.S.%20Rosenberg&author=T.M.%20Keaveny&volume=37&issue=2&publication_year=2004&pages=181-187&pmid=14706320&doi=10.1016/s0021-9290\(03\)00245-8&)]
  12. Hernandez C.J., Keaveny T.M. A biomechanical perspective on bone quality. Bone. 2006;39(6):1173–1181. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2006.06.001. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2006.06.001)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC1876764/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16876493/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=A%20biomechanical%20perspective%20on%20bone%20quality&author=C.J.%20Hernandez&author=T.M.%20Keaveny&volume=39&issue=6&publication_year=2006&pages=1173-1181&pmid=16876493&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2006.06.001&)]
  13. Janghorbani M., Van Dam R.M., Willett W.C., Hu F.B. Systematic review of type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus and risk of fracture. Am. J. Epidemiol. 2007;166(5):495–505. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwm106. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwm106)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17575306/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Epidemiol.&title=Systematic%20review%20of%20type%201%20and%20type%202%20diabetes%20mellitus%20and%20risk%20of%20fracture&author=M.%20Janghorbani&author=R.M.%20Van%20Dam&author=W.C.%20Willett&author=F.B.%20Hu&volume=166&issue=5&publication_year=2007&pages=495-505&pmid=17575306&doi=10.1093/aje/kwm106&)]
  14. Kaynia N., Soohoo E., Keaveny T.M., Kazakia G.J. Effect of intraspecimen spatial variation in tissue mineral density on the apparent stiffness of trabecular bone. J. Biomech. Eng. 2015;137(1) doi: 10.1115/1.4029178. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4029178)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4290509/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25412197/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biomech.%20Eng.&title=Effect%20of%20intraspecimen%20spatial%20variation%20in%20tissue%20mineral%20density%20on%20the%20apparent%20stiffness%20of%20trabecular%20bone&author=N.%20Kaynia&author=E.%20Soohoo&author=T.M.%20Keaveny&author=G.J.%20Kazakia&volume=137&issue=1&publication_year=2015&pmid=25412197&doi=10.1115/1.4029178&)]
  15. Keaveny T.M., Borchers R.E., Gibson L.J., Hayes W.C. Theoretical analysis of the experimental artifact in trabecular bone compressive modulus. J. Biomech. 1993;26(4–5):599–607. doi: 10.1016/0021-9290(93)90021-6. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-9290\(93\)90021-6)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8478361/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biomech.&title=Theoretical%20analysis%20of%20the%20experimental%20artifact%20in%20trabecular%20bone%20compressive%20modulus&author=T.M.%20Keaveny&author=R.E.%20Borchers&author=L.J.%20Gibson&author=W.C.%20Hayes&volume=26&issue=4%E2%80%935&publication_year=1993&pages=599-607&pmid=8478361&doi=10.1016/0021-9290\(93\)90021-6&)]
  16. Keaveny T.M., Wachtel E.F., Ford C.M., Hayes W.C. Differences between the tensile and compressive strengths of bovine tibial trabecular bone depend on modulus. J. Biomech. 1994;27(9):1137–1146. doi: 10.1016/0021-9290(94)90054-x. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-9290\(94\)90054-x)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7929463/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biomech.&title=Differences%20between%20the%20tensile%20and%20compressive%20strengths%20of%20bovine%20tibial%20trabecular%20bone%20depend%20on%20modulus&author=T.M.%20Keaveny&author=E.F.%20Wachtel&author=C.M.%20Ford&author=W.C.%20Hayes&volume=27&issue=9&publication_year=1994&pages=1137-1146&pmid=7929463&doi=10.1016/0021-9290\(94\)90054-x&)]
  17. Keaveny T.M., Guo X.E., Wachtel E.F., McMahon T.A., Hayes W.C. Trabecular bone exhibits fully linear elastic behavior and yields at low strains. J. Biomech. 1994;27(9):1127–1136. doi: 10.1016/0021-9290(94)90053-1. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-9290\(94\)90053-1)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7929462/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biomech.&title=Trabecular%20bone%20exhibits%20fully%20linear%20elastic%20behavior%20and%20yields%20at%20low%20strains&author=T.M.%20Keaveny&author=X.E.%20Guo&author=E.F.%20Wachtel&author=T.A.%20McMahon&author=W.C.%20Hayes&volume=27&issue=9&publication_year=1994&pages=1127-1136&pmid=7929462&doi=10.1016/0021-9290\(94\)90053-1&)]
  18. Keaveny T.M., Wachtel E.F., Guo X.E., Hayes W.C. Mechanical behavior of damaged trabecular bone. J. Biomech. 1994;27(11):1309–1318. doi: 10.1016/0021-9290(94)90040-x. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-9290\(94\)90040-x)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7798281/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biomech.&title=Mechanical%20behavior%20of%20damaged%20trabecular%20bone&author=T.M.%20Keaveny&author=E.F.%20Wachtel&author=X.E.%20Guo&author=W.C.%20Hayes&volume=27&issue=11&publication_year=1994&pages=1309-1318&pmid=7798281&doi=10.1016/0021-9290\(94\)90040-x&)]
  19. Keaveny T.M., Pinilla T.P., Crawford R.P., Kopperdahl D.L., Lou A. Systematic and random errors in compression testing of trabecular bone. J. Orthop. Res. 1997;15(1):101–110. doi: 10.1002/jor.1100150115. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/jor.1100150115)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9066533/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Orthop.%20Res.&title=Systematic%20and%20random%20errors%20in%20compression%20testing%20of%20trabecular%20bone&author=T.M.%20Keaveny&author=T.P.%20Pinilla&author=R.P.%20Crawford&author=D.L.%20Kopperdahl&author=A.%20Lou&volume=15&issue=1&publication_year=1997&pages=101-110&pmid=9066533&doi=10.1002/jor.1100150115&)]
  20. Keaveny T.M., Morgan E.F., Niebur G.L., Yeh O.C. Biomechanics of trabecular bone. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2001;3:307–333. doi: 10.1146/annurev.bioeng.3.1.307. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.bioeng.3.1.307)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11447066/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Annu.%20Rev.%20Biomed.%20Eng.&title=Biomechanics%20of%20trabecular%20bone&author=T.M.%20Keaveny&author=E.F.%20Morgan&author=G.L.%20Niebur&author=O.C.%20Yeh&volume=3&publication_year=2001&pages=307-333&pmid=11447066&doi=10.1146/annurev.bioeng.3.1.307&)]
  21. Kruzic J.J., Ritchie R.O. Fatigue of mineralized tissues: cortical bone and dentin. J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 2008;1(1):3–17. doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2007.04.002. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmbbm.2007.04.002)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19627767/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Mech.%20Behav.%20Biomed.%20Mater.&title=Fatigue%20of%20mineralized%20tissues:%20cortical%20bone%20and%20dentin&author=J.J.%20Kruzic&author=R.O.%20Ritchie&volume=1&issue=1&publication_year=2008&pages=3-17&pmid=19627767&doi=10.1016/j.jmbbm.2007.04.002&)]
  22. Lafferty J.F. Analytical model of the fatigue characteristics of bone. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 1978;49(1 Pt. 2):170–174. [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/623581/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Aviat.%20Space%20Environ.%20Med.&title=Analytical%20model%20of%20the%20fatigue%20characteristics%20of%20bone&author=J.F.%20Lafferty&volume=49&issue=1%20Pt.%202&publication_year=1978&pages=170-174&pmid=623581&)]
  23. Lambers F.M., Bouman A.R., Rimnac C.M., Hernandez C.J. Microdamage caused by fatigue loading in human cancellous bone: relationship to reductions in bone biomechanical performance. PLoS One. 2013;8(12) doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083662. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0083662)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC3875472/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24386247/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20One&title=Microdamage%20caused%20by%20fatigue%20loading%20in%20human%20cancellous%20bone:%20relationship%20to%20reductions%20in%20bone%20biomechanical%20performance&author=F.M.%20Lambers&author=A.R.%20Bouman&author=C.M.%20Rimnac&author=C.J.%20Hernandez&volume=8&issue=12&publication_year=2013&pmid=24386247&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0083662&)]
  24. McCubbrey D.A., Cody D.D., Peterson E.L., Kuhn J.L., Flynn M.J., Goldstein S.A. Static and fatigue failure properties of thoracic and lumbar vertebral bodies and their relation to regional density. J. Biomech. 1995;28(8):891–899. doi: 10.1016/0021-9290(94)00155-w. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-9290\(94\)00155-w)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7673257/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biomech.&title=Static%20and%20fatigue%20failure%20properties%20of%20thoracic%20and%20lumbar%20vertebral%20bodies%20and%20their%20relation%20to%20regional%20density&author=D.A.%20McCubbrey&author=D.D.%20Cody&author=E.L.%20Peterson&author=J.L.%20Kuhn&author=M.J.%20Flynn&volume=28&issue=8&publication_year=1995&pages=891-899&pmid=7673257&doi=10.1016/0021-9290\(94\)00155-w&)]
  25. Mosekilde L. Assessing bone quality—animal models in preclinical osteoporosis research. Bone. 1995;17(4 Suppl):343S–352S. doi: 10.1016/8756-3282(95)00312-2. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/8756-3282\(95\)00312-2)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8579937/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Assessing%20bone%20quality%E2%80%94animal%20models%20in%20preclinical%20osteoporosis%20research&author=L.%20Mosekilde&volume=17&issue=4%20Suppl&publication_year=1995&pages=343S-352S&pmid=8579937&doi=10.1016/8756-3282\(95\)00312-2&)]
  26. Nalla R.K., Kinney J.H., Ritchie R.O. Mechanistic fracture criteria for the failure of human cortical bone. Nat. Mater. 2003;2(3):164–168. doi: 10.1038/nmat832. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat832)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12612673/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Mater.&title=Mechanistic%20fracture%20criteria%20for%20the%20failure%20of%20human%20cortical%20bone&author=R.K.%20Nalla&author=J.H.%20Kinney&author=R.O.%20Ritchie&volume=2&issue=3&publication_year=2003&pages=164-168&pmid=12612673&doi=10.1038/nmat832&)]
  27. Odgaard A., Linde F. The underestimation of Young's modulus in compressive testing of cancellous bone specimens. J. Biomech. 1991;24(8):691–698. doi: 10.1016/0021-9290(91)90333-i. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-9290\(91\)90333-i)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1918092/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biomech.&title=The%20underestimation%20of%20Young's%20modulus%20in%20compressive%20testing%20of%20cancellous%20bone%20specimens&author=A.%20Odgaard&author=F.%20Linde&volume=24&issue=8&publication_year=1991&pages=691-698&pmid=1918092&doi=10.1016/0021-9290\(91\)90333-i&)]
  28. Odgaard A., Hvid I., Linde F. Compressive axial strain distributions in cancellous bone specimens. J. Biomech. 1989;22(8–9):829–835. doi: 10.1016/0021-9290(89)90066-3. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-9290\(89\)90066-3)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2613718/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biomech.&title=Compressive%20axial%20strain%20distributions%20in%20cancellous%20bone%20specimens&author=A.%20Odgaard&author=I.%20Hvid&author=F.%20Linde&volume=22&issue=8%E2%80%939&publication_year=1989&pages=829-835&pmid=2613718&doi=10.1016/0021-9290\(89\)90066-3&)]
  29. Ominsky M.S., Stouch B., Schroeder J., Pyrah I., Stolina M., Smith S.Y., Kostenuik P.J. Denosumab, a fully human RANKL antibody, reduced bone turnover markers and increased trabecular and cortical bone mass, density, and strength in ovariectomized cynomolgus monkeys. Bone. 2011;49(2):162–173. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2011.04.001. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2011.04.001)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21497676/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Denosumab,%20a%20fully%20human%20RANKL%20antibody,%20reduced%20bone%20turnover%20markers%20and%20increased%20trabecular%20and%20cortical%20bone%20mass,%20density,%20and%20strength%20in%20ovariectomized%20cynomolgus%20monkeys&author=M.S.%20Ominsky&author=B.%20Stouch&author=J.%20Schroeder&author=I.%20Pyrah&author=M.%20Stolina&volume=49&issue=2&publication_year=2011&pages=162-173&pmid=21497676&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2011.04.001&)]
  30. Rubin M.R., Patsch J.M. Assessment of bone turnover and bone quality in type 2 diabetic bone disease: current concepts and future directions. Bone Res. 2016;4 doi: 10.1038/boneres.2016.1. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/boneres.2016.1)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4802604/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27019762/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone%20Res.&title=Assessment%20of%20bone%20turnover%20and%20bone%20quality%20in%20type%202%20diabetic%20bone%20disease:%20current%20concepts%20and%20future%20directions&author=M.R.%20Rubin&author=J.M.%20Patsch&volume=4&publication_year=2016&pmid=27019762&doi=10.1038/boneres.2016.1&)]
  31. Saito M., Marumo K. Collagen cross-links as a determinant of bone quality: a possible explanation for bone fragility in aging, osteoporosis, and diabetes mellitus. Osteoporos. Int. 2010;21(2):195–214. doi: 10.1007/s00198-009-1066-z. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-009-1066-z)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19760059/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Osteoporos.%20Int.&title=Collagen%20cross-links%20as%20a%20determinant%20of%20bone%20quality:%20a%20possible%20explanation%20for%20bone%20fragility%20in%20aging,%20osteoporosis,%20and%20diabetes%20mellitus&author=M.%20Saito&author=K.%20Marumo&volume=21&issue=2&publication_year=2010&pages=195-214&pmid=19760059&doi=10.1007/s00198-009-1066-z&)]
  32. Schileo E., Taddei F., Cristofolini L., Viceconti M. Subject-specific finite element models implementing a maximum principal strain criterion are able to estimate failure risk and fracture location on human femurs tested in vitro. J. Biomech. 2008;41(2):356–367. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2007.09.009. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2007.09.009)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18022179/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biomech.&title=Subject-specific%20finite%20element%20models%20implementing%20a%20maximum%20principal%20strain%20criterion%20are%20able%20to%20estimate%20failure%20risk%20and%20fracture%20location%20on%20human%20femurs%20tested%20in%20vitro&author=E.%20Schileo&author=F.%20Taddei&author=L.%20Cristofolini&author=M.%20Viceconti&volume=41&issue=2&publication_year=2008&pages=356-367&pmid=18022179&doi=10.1016/j.jbiomech.2007.09.009&)]
  33. Seeman E., Delmas P.D. Bone quality—the material and structural basis of bone strength and fragility. N. Engl. J. Med. 2006;354(21):2250–2261. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra053077. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra053077)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16723616/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N.%20Engl.%20J.%20Med.&title=Bone%20quality%E2%80%94the%20material%20and%20structural%20basis%20of%20bone%20strength%20and%20fragility&author=E.%20Seeman&author=P.D.%20Delmas&volume=354&issue=21&publication_year=2006&pages=2250-2261&pmid=16723616&doi=10.1056/NEJMra053077&)]
  34. Turner C.H., Burr D.B. Basic biomechanical measurements of bone: a tutorial. Bone. 1993;14(4):595–608. doi: 10.1016/8756-3282(93)90081-k. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/8756-3282\(93\)90081-k)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8274302/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Basic%20biomechanical%20measurements%20of%20bone:%20a%20tutorial&author=C.H.%20Turner&author=D.B.%20Burr&volume=14&issue=4&publication_year=1993&pages=595-608&pmid=8274302&doi=10.1016/8756-3282\(93\)90081-k&)]
  35. Vestergaard P. Discrepancies in bone mineral density and fracture risk in patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes—a meta-analysis. Osteoporos. Int. 2007;18(4):427–444. doi: 10.1007/s00198-006-0253-4. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-006-0253-4)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17068657/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Osteoporos.%20Int.&title=Discrepancies%20in%20bone%20mineral%20density%20and%20fracture%20risk%20in%20patients%20with%20type%201%20and%20type%202%20diabetes%E2%80%94a%20meta-analysis&author=P.%20Vestergaard&volume=18&issue=4&publication_year=2007&pages=427-444&pmid=17068657&doi=10.1007/s00198-006-0253-4&)]
  36. Yamamoto E., Paul Crawford R., Chan D.D., Keaveny T.M. Development of residual strains in human vertebral trabecular bone after prolonged static and cyclic loading at low load levels. J. Biomech. 2006;39(10):1812–1818. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2005.05.017. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2005.05.017)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16038915/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biomech.&title=Development%20of%20residual%20strains%20in%20human%20vertebral%20trabecular%20bone%20after%20prolonged%20static%20and%20cyclic%20loading%20at%20low%20load%20levels&author=E.%20Yamamoto&author=R.%20Paul%20Crawford&author=D.D.%20Chan&author=T.M.%20Keaveny&volume=39&issue=10&publication_year=2006&pages=1812-1818&pmid=16038915&doi=10.1016/j.jbiomech.2005.05.017&)]

## Associated Data

_This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or
supplementary materials included in this article._

### Supplementary Materials

Supplementary material

[mmc1.zip](/articles/instance/6222041/bin/mmc1.zip) (9.3KB, zip)

* * *

Articles from Bone Reports are provided here courtesy of **Elsevier**

