Bone

. Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2020 Nov 1.

_Published in final edited form as:_ Bone. 2019 Aug 21;128:115043. doi:
[10.1016/j.bone.2019.115043](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2019.115043)

  * [Search in PMC](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/search/?term=%22Bone%22%5Bjour%5D)
  * [Search in PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Bone%22%5Bjour%5D)
  * [View in NLM Catalog](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nlmcatalog?term=%22Bone%22%5BTitle%20Abbreviation%5D)
  * [Add to search](?term=%22Bone%22%5Bjour%5D)

# Effects of _ex vivo_ Ionizing Radiation on Collagen Structure and Whole-Bone
Mechanical Properties of Mouse Vertebrae

[Megan M
Pendleton](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Pendleton%20MM%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Megan M Pendleton

1Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley,
California, USA

Find articles by [Megan M
Pendleton](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Pendleton%20MM%22%5BAuthor%5D)

1,*, [Shannon R
Emerzian](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Emerzian%20SR%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Shannon R Emerzian

1Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley,
California, USA

Find articles by [Shannon R
Emerzian](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Emerzian%20SR%22%5BAuthor%5D)

1,*, [Jennifer
Liu](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Liu%20J%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Jennifer Liu

2Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA

Find articles by [Jennifer
Liu](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Liu%20J%22%5BAuthor%5D)

2, [Simon Y
Tang](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Tang%20SY%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Simon Y Tang

2Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA

3Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA

4Department of Material Science & Mechanical Engineering, Washington
University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA

Find articles by [Simon Y
Tang](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Tang%20SY%22%5BAuthor%5D)

2,3,4, [Grace D
O’Connell](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22O%E2%80%99Connell%20GD%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Grace D O’Connell

1Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley,
California, USA

5Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California, San Francisco,
California, USA

Find articles by [Grace D
O’Connell](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22O%E2%80%99Connell%20GD%22%5BAuthor%5D)

1,5, [Joshua S
Alwood](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Alwood%20JS%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Joshua S Alwood

6Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field,
California, USA

Find articles by [Joshua S
Alwood](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Alwood%20JS%22%5BAuthor%5D)

6, [Tony M
Keaveny](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Keaveny%20TM%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Tony M Keaveny

1Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley,
California, USA

7Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, California,
USA

Find articles by [Tony M
Keaveny](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Keaveny%20TM%22%5BAuthor%5D)

1,7

  * Author information
  * Article notes
  * Copyright and License information

1Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley,
California, USA

2Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA

3Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA

4Department of Material Science & Mechanical Engineering, Washington
University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA

5Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California, San Francisco,
California, USA

6Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field,
California, USA

7Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, California,
USA

*

these authors contributed equally to this work

✉

Corresponding author: Tony M. Keaveny; tonykeaveny@berkeley.edu, 5124
Etcheverry Hall, Mailstop 1740, University of California, Berkeley, CA
94720-1740

Issue date 2019 Nov.

[PMC Copyright notice](/about/copyright/)

PMCID: PMC6813909 NIHMSID: NIHMS1538854 PMID:
[31445224](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31445224/)

The publisher's version of this article is available at
[Bone](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2019.115043)

## Abstract

Bone can become brittle when exposed to ionizing radiation across a wide range
of clinically relevant doses that span from radiotherapy (accumulative 50 Gy)
to sterilization (~35,000 Gy). While irradiation-induced embrittlement has
been attributed to changes in the collagen molecular structure, the relative
role of collagen fragmentation versus non-enzymatic collagen crosslinking
remains unclear. To better understand the effects of radiation on the bone
material without cellular activity, we conducted an _ex vivo_ x-ray radiation
experiment on excised mouse lumbar vertebrae. Spinal tissue from twenty-week
old, female, C57BL/6J mice were randomly assigned to a single x-ray radiation
dose of either 0 (control), 50, 1,000, 17,000, or 35,000 Gy. Measurements were
made for collagen fragmentation, non-enzymatic collagen crosslinking, and both
monotonic and cyclic-loading compressive mechanical properties. We found that
the group differences for mechanical properties were more consistent with
those for collagen fragmentation than for non-enzymatic collagen crosslinking.
Monotonic strength at 17,000 and 35,000 Gy was lower than that of the control
by 50% and 73% respectively, (_p_ < 0.001) but at 50 and 1,000 Gy was not
different than the control. Consistent with those trends, collagen
fragmentation only occurred at 17,000 and 35,000 Gy. By contrast, non-
enzymatic collagen crosslinking was greater than control for all radiation
doses (_p_ < 0.001). All results were consistent both for monotonic and cyclic
loading conditions. We conclude that the reductions in bone compressive
monotonic strength and fatigue life due to _ex vivo_ ionizing radiation are
more likely caused by fragmentation of the collagen backbone than any
increases in non-enzymatic collagen crosslinks.

**Keywords:** ionizing radiation, bone strength, fatigue, collagen,
sterilization, bone-graft

## 1\. Introduction

For a variety of clinical applications, bones are exposed to a wide range of
ionizing radiation doses. _In vivo_ , radiotherapy treatment results in an
accumulated localized dose of ~50 Gy1 in cancer patients [1–3]. _Ex vivo_ ,
bone allografts are sterilized at a dose of 30,000 ± 5,000 Gy [4,5]. While
these high-dose applications are critical for overall patient health and
safety, high levels of ionizing radiation exposure have been shown to increase
risk of fracture [6,7]. For example, for women with anal, rectal or colon
cancer, those treated with radiation therapy were more than three times as
likely to suffer a pelvic fracture than those without radiation therapy [8].
Furthermore, for patients with implanted bone allografts, allografts
sterilized with radiation were twice as likely to fail compared to allografts
sterilized using other methods [9]. The increased risk of fracture clinically
has led to research into the effect of high levels of ionizing radiation
exposure on the mechanical and biochemical properties of bone.

Numerous _ex vivo_ studies on either cortical or cancellous bone have
demonstrated that ionizing radiation degrades mechanical properties and
collagen molecular structure independent of cellular activity. The
demonstrated reduction in post-yield properties — ultimate strain, ultimate
strength, fracture toughness, work-to-failure — of irradiated bone [10–15] has
been attributed to changes in collagen molecular structure [16–18]. Though the
exact mechanism dominating irradiation-induced collagen degradation is not
fully known, two mechanisms have been suggested as causes for diminished
mechanics [10,12–14,19–23]. First, the collagen backbone can be fragmented
when the molecular bonds are cleaved directly by x- and gamma-rays, breaking
the intact protein chain into smaller polypeptides. Second, collagen molecules
can be non-enzymatically crosslinked when radiolysis of water molecules
creates free radicals, which cause inter- and intra- molecular bonds within
collagen chains. However, it remains unclear which mechanism is more causative
and at what dose these mechanisms manifest. Because changes in collagen
structure are associated with a number of clinical conditions, an improved
biomechanical understanding of each mechanism (i.e. non-enzymatic crosslinks
and fragmentation) may provide insight into applications of irradiation [22],
and also aging [24] and diabetes [25–28].

Addressing these issues, we conducted an _ex vivo_ ionizing radiation
experiment on mouse vertebrae spanning a range of clinically-related radiation
doses (i.e. radiation therapy to allograft sterilization) and conducted a
suite of mechanical and biochemical assays to assess radiation-induced
changes. Specifically, our objectives were to: 1) quantify the effects of
radiation dose on the monotonic strength and fatigue life of murine vertebrae;
and 2) determine whether the degradation in mechanical properties is dominated
by the amount of non-enzymatic crosslinks or fragmented collagen.

## 2\. Materials and Methods

### 2.1. Animals

Forty-eight female, 20-week old (skeletally-mature) C57BL/6J mice (Jackson
Labs, Sacramento, CA) were randomly assigned to five groups (N = 9–10 per
group). Mice were euthanized prior to _ex vivo_ irradiation. All procedures
were approved by the University of California Berkeley Animal Care and Use
Committee.

### 2.2. Specimen preparation

Lumbar vertebrae (L3, L4, L5, S1) were excised and gently cleaned of soft
tissue, wrapped in saline-soaked gauze (Gibco PBS 1X, pH 7.4), and stored at
−20°C. In preparation for mechanical testing, the vertebral bodies of the L4
and L5 levels were isolated, endplates precisely planed using a diamond
microtome (Leica SP1600 Saw Microtome, Wetzlar, Germany) and posterior
elements removed [29].

### 2.3. Ex Vivo X-Ray Irradiation

After specimen preparation, _ex vivo_ irradiation was performed on all
vertebrae. Mice were randomly assigned to one of five dose groups for x-ray
irradiation: 0, 50, 1,000, 17,000, or 35,000 Gy; all vertebral levels from the
same animal remained in the same radiation dose group (e.g. an animal assigned
to the 50 Gy group had its L3, L4, L5, and S1 irradiated with 50 Gy).
Irradiation was performed (Advanced Light Source synchrotron facility at
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory) using an x-ray synchrotron micro-
tomography beam line, at 21 keV and 500 mA, for a dose rate of 13.3 Gy/sec
(see [30] for details on dose calculations). Specimen hydration was maintained
during irradiation via saline-soaked gauze.

### 2.4. Quantitative micro-CT Imaging

After irradiation, the L4 and L5 specimens were imaged with quantitative
micro-CT (µCT 50, Scanco Medical AG, Bruttisellen, Switzerland) using a 10-µm
voxel size (55 kV, 109 µA, 1000 projections per 180°, 500 ms integration
time). Micro-CT images of the L4 and L5 specimens were analyzed for height
(ImageJ 2.0, Java 1.6.0). The total bone volume of the vertebrae was measured
on the L5 only (ImageJ 2.0, BoneJ2). After manual segmentation of the
trabecular compartment, the following parameters were measured between the top
and bottom surface of the L5 vertebra: trabecular bone volume fraction
(Tb.BV/TV), number (Tb.N), thickness (Tb.Th), and separation (Tb.Sp) (Scanco
Medical µCT Evaluation Program v6.5) [29]. The micro-CT analysis confirmed
successful random sample distribution; there were no significant differences
in bone quantity or microarchitecture between the groups.

### 2.5. Mechanical Characterization

After micro-CT imaging, uniaxial compressive monotonic (L4) and cyclic (L5)
mechanical testing was performed (TA ElectroForce 3200, Eden Prairie, MN; 25
mm linear encoder, measured error 9 µm). Monotonic testing was conducted
(displacement rate of 0.01 mm/sec; strain rate ranged from 0.5 to 0.8%
strain/s) to provide measurements of stiffness, strength (maximum force),
ultimate strain (displacement measured by the linear encoder at maximum force
divided by specimen height determined via micro-CT) [31], and work-to-fracture
(Figure 1A).

#### Figure 1:

![Figure
1:](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/ec73/6813909/d4aa9a59a78f/nihms-1538854-f0001.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/F1/)

Representative plots generated from mechanical testing of the vertebral
specimens. (**A**) For monotonic compression testing, a force-displacement
curve was used to calculate stiffness (K), ultimate force (Fult), ultimate
displacement (dult), and work to fracture (W; area in gray). (**B**) For
cyclic testing, maximum apparent strain per cycle was plotted to obtain
fatigue life (Nf), strain-to-failure (εf), and elastic stiffness (Kelastic),
see [29] for details.

Cyclic testing was conducted using methods described in detail by Pendleton et
al. [29]. In brief, in order to compare the fatigue life across all radiation
dose groups, the fatigue test was designed such that the same initial strains
were applied to all samples [29]. Using micro-CT based finite element models
of each specimen, we computationally derived the specimen-specific forces
(Fmin and Fmax) required to achieve the desired initial strains (εmin = 0.05%
and εmax = 0.5%) during cyclic testing. Thus, specimens were cyclically loaded
in uniaxial compression between the specimen-specific Fmin and Fmax values
until failure (TA ElectroForce 3200, Eden Prairie, MN; 50 lb. load cell,
resolution ±0.1 N). Cyclic loading properties measured include fatigue life
(Nf) (i.e. number of cycles to failure), strain-to-failure (εf), and specimen
elastic stiffness (Kelastic) (Figure 1B). Cyclic testing was not performed for
specimens where the calculated Fmax exceeded the dose group strength observed
from monotonic testing, as these specimens would have failed within one
loading cycle (confirmed by testing a small sample; data not shown).

### 2.6. Biochemical Characterization

After irradiation, two biochemical tests (N = 4 specimens for each test) were
conducted to assess the two primary molecular mechanisms that are thought to
alter bone mechanics: (1) the accumulation of non-enzymatic crosslinks was
measured on the S1 vertebrae; (2) the fragmentation of the collagen backbone
was quantified on the L3 vertebrae.

To assess non-enzymatic collagen crosslinking, we quantified the relative
amount of fluorescent advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) on the S1
vertebrae. AGEs, which form intra- and inter-fibrillar crosslinks along the
collagen backbone through oxidation or glycation processes [26,32–34], were
quantified using a fluorometric assay (protocol adapted from Sell et al.
[35]). Each S1 specimen was demineralized in 0.5 M ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid (EDTA) and hydrolyzed in 12N HCl at 120°C for 3 hours to break down
peptide bonds. The hydrolysate was then resuspended in PBS (0.1X) and pipetted
in triplicate onto a black-walled 96 well plate. The non-enzymatic collagen
crosslink content was determined using fluorescence readings taken using a
microplate reader at wavelengths of 370 nm excitation and 440 nm emission. The
readings were standardized to a quinine-sulfate standard (quinine dissolved in
H2SO4) and then normalized to the amount of collagen present in each sample,
approximated by the amount of hydroxyproline [13,36]. The quantification of
non-enzymatic collagen crosslinks was achieved via the fluorometric assay that
determined the relative fluorescence due to advanced glycation end-products
(AGEs) relative to the amount of collagen in the bone matrix. The relative
amount of non-enzymatic collagen crosslinks (fluorescent AGEs) for each
radiation group was compared to the control.

To assess collagen fragmentation, we used an automated electrophoresis assay
(2100 Bioanalyzer, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) to quantify the
molecular weight distribution of collagen isolated from the L3 vertebrae.
First, we isolated the collagen via methods adapted from Burton et al. [10]
(see [30] for details). In brief, L3 specimens were demineralized over 3 weeks
in 0.5M ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) with the solution changed every
2–3 days. Demineralized specimens were defatted for 24-hours in a 1:1 solution
of chloroform and methanol and then soaked in 100% methanol for another hour.
Specimens were dried in a desiccator overnight, and then flash-frozen with
liquid-nitrogen and crushed into bone powder using a mortar and pestle. Bone
powder was then lyophilized (Sequence: −38°C for 180 minutes, −38°C at 120
mTorr for 90 minutes, −20°C at 770 mTorr for 900 minutes, −10 °C at 930 mTorr
for 270 minutes, and 23°C at 120 mTorr for 55 minutes) (VirTis AdVantage Plus
Benchtop Freeze Dryer XL Model, SP Scientific, Stone Ridge, NY). For tissue
digestion, the powder was added to a solution of 0.5M acetic acid and pepsin
(1mg of pepsin per 10 mg of bone powder) and placed on a rocker at 4°C for
72-hours. To neutralize the digestion process 5M NaOH was added until pH was
neutral (pH = 6–8). To remove non-soluble collagen and non-collagenous
proteins, samples were centrifuged for 30 minutes at 13,000 RPM. The
supernatant, containing the soluble collagen, was collected. To precipitate
the collagen out of solution, solid NaCl was added to a final concentration of
2M NaCl and placed on a rocker at 4°C for 24-hours. Samples were centrifuged
for 30 minutes at 13,000 RPM. The supernatant was removed, and the pellets
were resuspended in 200 uL of 0.5M acetic acid. Samples were then lyophilized
and stored at −20°C until electrophoresis. In preparation for electrophoresis,
the isolated collagen was dissolved in 1X PBS, mixed with additional reagents
(Agilent Technologies Protein 230 Manual), and loaded on a bioanalyzer chip
for automated electrophoresis. Rat-tail collagen (Sigma Aldrich, C7661–25MG)
was run as a standard. From this assay, the distribution of molecular weights
of the collagen protein was assessed in two ways: (1) visually with a
software-generated “gel” and (2) quantitatively with a software-generated
fluorescence unit (FU) chart, called an “electropherogram” (Agilent 2100
Expert software). The nominal size of a type-I collagen, either alpha-1 or
alpha-2, is between 130–150 kDa. To identify chain fragmentation, we looked
for evidence of less protein in this range, and a wider distribution of
molecular weights. On the gel, this was observed as a lighter-colored band or
smeared band at ~150 kDa. On the electropherogram, fragmentation can be
observed when the peak at ~150 kDa is diminished, indicating fewer
fluorescence units and therefore fewer collagen chains of the nominal size.
The quantification of collagen fragmentation was achieved via the software-
generated electropherogram by comparing the quantity of fluorescence units
(FU) at the nominal collagen chain length (~150 kDa) for each radiation group
to the control.

### 2.7. Statistics

We used a one-way ANOVA to test for radiation effects, followed by Dunnett’s
_post-hoc_ test (at _p_ ≤ 0.05) to compare each group against the control (0
Gy) (JMP v 14.0, SAS Institute). For those measurements that were not normally
distributed (ultimate strain), a Kruskal-Wallis test was conducted instead,
followed by the Steel _post-hoc_ to compare each group against the control
(JMP v 14.0, SAS Institute). In order to compare the magnitude of responses
across the different measurements – vertebral strength, crosslink AGEs, and
fragmentation fluorescence – each datum for the individual specimen was
normalized by the mean value of that measurement for the control group. Then,
the means of these normalized values for the crosslink AGEs and fragmentation
fluorescence measurements were individually compared against the mean
normalized value for vertebral strength, using a Student’s t-test (_p_ ≤ 0.05)
(JMP v 14.0, SAS Institute).

## 3\. Results

### 3.1. Mechanical Characterization

For monotonic compression testing, the vertebral strength, ultimate strain,
and work-to-fracture were lower than the control group for radiation exposures
of 17,000 and 35,000 Gy but were not different than the control group for
exposures of 50 and 1,000 Gy. Compared to the control group, for the exposures
of 17,000 and 35,000 Gy, vertebral strength was 50% and 73% lower (_p_ <
0.001, Figure 2), respectively, ultimate strain was 58% and 77% lower (Steel
post-hoc _p_ < 0.05, Figure 2), and work-to-fracture was 76% and 92% lower
(_p_ < 0.01, data not shown). In contrast, monotonic stiffness remained
unchanged for all radiation dose groups compared to the control group (691.3 ±
179.5 N/mm; _p_ = 0.67, Figure 2).

#### Figure 2:

![Figure
2:](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/ec73/6813909/b71a491b799e/nihms-1538854-f0002.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/F2/)

Effect of _ex vivo_ x-ray radiation on mechanical (monotonic vertebral
strength, ultimate strain and stiffness; cyclic fatigue life), biochemical
(collagen crosslink AGEs and collagen fragmentation), and micro-CT (Tb.BV/TV)
properties of mouse lumbar vertebrae. Data are shown as least-square means;
error bars represent 95% confidence intervals. † indicates cycles to failure
not measured. * _p_ < 0.05 using Dunnett’s post-hoc test; # _p_ < 0.05 using
Steel’s post-hoc test.

Similar trends, but more accentuated, were observed for the cyclic properties.
Monotonic strength of 17,000 and 35,000 Gy groups were less than the
prescribed cyclic loading force, Fmax, and thus cyclic testing was not
conducted for these two groups since the specimens would have fractured after
one cycle of loading (confirmed by testing a small sample, data not shown).
Fatigue life (5.2 ± 0.4 log(cycles); _p_ = 0.50, Figure 2), strain to failure
(3.8 ± 1.0 %; _p_ = 0.41, data not shown), and elastic stiffness (1273 ± 162
N/mm; _p_ = 0.31, data not shown) for the 50 and 1,000 Gy exposures did not
differ from the control.

### 3.2. Biochemical Characterization

The relative amount of non-enzymatic collagen crosslinks (fluorescent AGEs)
was greater for all radiation groups by nearly twofold, and increased in a
dose-dependent manner: by 67%, 95%, 96%, and 108% for 50, 1,000, 17,000 and
35,000 Gy, respectively, compared to the control (42.2 ± 2.3 ng quinine / mg
collagen; _p_ < 0.001, Figure 2).

In contrast, collagen fragmentation was only observed at doses of 17,000 and
35,000 Gy (Figure 2). Fragmentation at these doses was observed on both the
software-generated gel (Figure 3A) and electropherogram (Figure 3B). On the
gel, a dark band was visible at the nominal collagen chain length of 150 kDa
for samples of 0, 50, and 1,000 Gy. This band began to lighten at 17,000 and
35,000 Gy, indicating fewer collagen proteins of this chain size. Also, a
“smearing” of bands was observed below 150 kDa, suggesting that there was a
greater amount of collagen fragmented chains with lower molecular weights. On
the electropherogram, the same result can be observed. The peak fluorescence
unit found at 150 kDa for 17,000 Gy decreased by 74% compared to the control
(460 ± 72 FU; _p_ < 0.02).

#### Figure 3:

![Figure
3:](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/ec73/6813909/8f65ce388308/nihms-1538854-f0003.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/F3/)

Output from the automated electrophoresis assay (collagen fragmentation).
(**A**) A representative gel. (**B**) A representative electropherogram with
the results of 0 and 17,000 Gy overlaid. The peak fluorescence unit found at
150 kDa for 17,000 Gy (red) is significantly lower compared to the 0 Gy
control (blue).

When comparing the magnitudes of the effects across the different (normalized)
measurements, for all radiation doses, the normalized values were higher for
crosslinking than for vertebral strength (_p_ < 0.01) (Figure 4). By contrast,
the normalized values for the unfragmented collagen chains were not different
than for vertebral strength (_p_ > 0.55), except at the 17,000 Gy dose, for
which the difference was significant (_p_ = 0.03) but small (vertebral
strength 0.50 ± 0.06; fragmentation 0.26 ± 0.03) (Figure 4).

#### Figure 4:

![Figure
4:](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/ec73/6813909/4713e8c55f17/nihms-1538854-f0004.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/F4/)

Comparison of vertebral strength with two primary mechanisms of collagen
degradation: (1) collagen crosslinks represented by AGEs, and (2) collagen
fragmentation indicated by a lower fluorescence unit (FU) value indicating
less collagen with a nominal chain length, by radiation dose. Data were
normalized by the mean of their respective 0 Gy control, and shown as
normalized least-square means, with error bars signifying 95% confidence
intervals analyzed by ANOVA with Dunnett’s post-hoc test, _p_ < 0.05. *
represents _p_ < 0.0001 for vertebral ultimate strength; † represents _p_ <
0.0001 for AGEs; ‡ represents _p_ < 0.05 for FU.

### 3.3. Quantitative micro-CT Imaging

The micro-CT analysis confirmed successful random sample distribution; there
were no significant differences in bone quantity or microarchitecture between
the groups. Total bone volume (1.41 ± 0.16 mm3, _p_ = 0.71, data not shown),
as well as trabecular bone volume fraction (18.79 ± 0.94 %, _p_ = 0.20, Figure
2), number (3.92 ± 0.13 1/mm, _p_ = 0.35, data not shown), and separation
(256.97 ± 8.81 µm, _p_ = 0.47, data not shown) were the same for all groups.
ANOVA results for trabecular thickness were significant (_p_ = 0.036), however
a Tukey post-hoc analysis found no differences between any groups (50.17 ± 68
µm, _p_ > 0.05, data not shown).

## 4\. Discussion

These results demonstrate that the monotonic strength of murine vertebral
bodies was only diminished when exposed to ionizing radiation at or above
17,000 Gy. While the relative amount of non-enzymatic collagen crosslinks was
greater for all radiation groups compared to the control, the increase in
crosslinks measured at lower doses (50 and 1,000 Gy) did not coincide with the
observed reduction in mechanical strength (Figure 4). In contrast to
crosslinks, collagen fragmentation was only observed at doses where reduced
mechanical properties were also observed (17,000 and 35,000 Gy; Figure 4).
Thus, our results suggest that the fragmentation of collagen — and not the
accumulation of non-enzymatic collagen crosslinks — was the primary molecular
mechanism that caused the observed reductions in mechanical properties in
whole bones exposed to ionizing radiation.

Our results are consistent with previous radiation studies and provide novel
insight into the effect of _ex vivo_ ionizing radiation on bone mechanics. In
accordance with previous investigations of cortical bone, we observed a
reduction in both monotonic and fatigue properties at a dose equivalent to
nominal allograft sterilization of ~30,000 ± 5,000 Gy [10,15,20,37–39], and a
reduction of monotonic strength at 17,000 Gy [11]. While our study is
consistent with earlier observations, our findings expand upon previous
knowledge in three important areas. First, previous inquiries have been
conducted on either cortical [10,11,15,20,37–39] or trabecular [40] bone
tissue specimens, not whole-bones. Second, mechanical characterization has
been primarily conducted in either monotonic or fatigue loading conditions,
not both. Finally, only a subset of these studies has conducted concurrent
collagen biochemical analysis, quantifying either crosslinks [13] or
fragmentation [10,37,39]. For the first time, we have demonstrated the effect
of irradiation on whole-bones (with both cortical and trabecular tissue)
across a spectrum of clinically-relevant doses (i.e. radiation therapy at 50
Gy to allograft sterilization at 35,000 Gy) with both monotonic and fatigue
mechanical tests, as well as parallel collagen biochemical assays. We expand
on the work of Currey et al. [11] and demonstrate that in addition to a
reduction in monotonic strength following irradiation at 17,000 Gy, fatigue
properties are also significantly reduced. Importantly, we have demonstrated
the doses at which the differences in collagen structure and mechanics arise.
Our results provide new insight into the type of molecular change driving the
degradation of whole-bone strength and fatigue life following irradiation.

While the exact collagen modifications dominating reduced strength following
irradiation are not fully understood, we examined the two proposed mechanisms:
photon-induced fragmentation of the collagen backbone [10,20] or radiolysis-
induced non-enzymatic collagen crosslinks [12,13,21–23]. Our results suggest
that increased collagen fragmentation, and not non-enzymatic crosslinking, is
the dominant factor. While no previous studies have quantified the
fragmentation of collagen in irradiated whole-bones, our results are in
agreement with previous work on cortical bone, which demonstrated that
diminished fracture toughness at doses of ~35,000 Gy was a result of collagen
fragmentation [10,37]. Expanding on this knowledge, we demonstrate that
collagen fragmentation leads to degraded murine whole-bone mechanics at 17,000
Gy, a dose signifiantly lower than the standard for allograft sterilization
(25,000 – 35,000 Gy). Our findings emphasize the need for further research
into novel radioprotectants that target fragmentation in order to maintain
bone strength when sterilizing allografts with radiation [10].

Importantly, our findings suggest that non-enzymatic collagen crosslinks may
play a smaller role in degrading mechanical strength of bone than previously
considered. Previously, numerous studies attributed the increase in non-
enzymatic crosslink concentration as the primary mechanism for degraded bone
strength, specifically in applications of natural aging [24,36,41], drug
treatments [42], irradiation sterilization [13], and diseases such as
osteoporosis [43] and diabetes [26,44–47]. While the concentration of non-
enzymatic crosslinks does accumulate in bone collagen in these applications,
any causation of those crosslinks with respect to degraded mechanical
properties has not been established. Here, we observed that despite a
substantial (95%) increase in crosslink concentration, we could not detect any
effect on vertebral strength. Indeed, studies have demonstrated that an
increase in non-enzymatic crosslinks induced via ribose incubation can be used
to counter the loss of strength due to the fragmentation of the collagen
network, not degrade it further [39,48,49]. Taken together, our results
strengthen the argument that the contribution of non-enzymatic crosslinks to
diminished bone strength with disease and aging plays a smaller role in
comparison to other factors, such as collagen network connectivity [50].

There are some limitations in this study. First, because we tested mouse bone,
the direct application of our findings to human bone is unclear. However, as
discussed above, similar trends in irradiation-induced degraded bone strength
[10,11,15,20,37–39,51–55] and molecular-level changes [10,55] have been seen
in other studies across a number of anatomic sites and species, including
human bone. That consistency suggests our results are not limited to murine
bone. Second, as an _ex vivo_ study, we excluded the impact of any
biologically induced responses to radiation in order to explore the extent to
which radiation directly alters the mechanical behavior of the bone matrix.
For applications of allograft sterilization, which are only conducted _ex
vivo_ , excluding cellular effects is appropriate. However, for _in vivo_
applications of radiation therapy, there can be cellular-driven changes, such
as reduced bone volume fraction or altered trabecular microarchitecture [50],
which can alter bone mechanics beyond what is reported here. Thus, our method
of irradiation is directly comparable to _ex vivo_ allograft sterilization;
for doses equivalent to _in vivo_ radiotherapy treatment (50 Gy), our method
is only applicable when considering the direct effects of radiation on the
bone matrix. Additionally, we performed all mechanical tests, monotonic and
cyclic, in compression. While compressive loading is most relevant for _in
vivo_ behavior, the response may be different for isolated specimens tested in
pure tension.

Finally, because our study did not investigate doses between 1,000 and 17,000
Gy, it is unclear at what dose within this range reduced mechanical properties
can first be observed. To address this gap, we conducted a post-hoc study for
doses of 5,000 and 10,000 Gy (see Appendix) with the same mechanical and
biochemical assays described above. We found some mechanical differences
occurred with radiation exposure of 5,000 Gy (and above), but only for cyclic
loading: compared to the control, fatigue life was lower by 18% (_p_ < 0.01)
but monotonic strength was not different (_p_ = 0.12). These ad hoc results
confirm previous observations that cyclic loading may be a more sensitive test
than monotonic loading for detecting mechanical effects of radiation [13,20].
Clinically, radiation-induced fractures are often observed months to years
after irradiation and classified as spontaneous or insufficiency fractures
(i.e. fractures which are not the result of a fall or trauma, and more likely
due to repetitive loading at low forces over time) [56–58]. As such, it is
clinically important to consider mechanisms that can affect cyclic loading
properties differently than static loading properties. Furthermore, our
findings have expanded our knowledge to show fatigue properties are also
significantly reduced with doses as low as 5,000 Gy.

Clinically, our results have implications for safe sterilization of allografts
and potential radioprotectants. A dose of 11,000 Gy has been proposed as a
safe sterilization dose for allografts [59], as this dose achieves the same
sterility level as the current standard dose of 30,000 ± 5,000 Gy [4,5].
However, our supplemental findings suggest collagen fragmentation and
associated loss of cyclic mechanical properties can begin with a dose as low
as 5,000 Gy (see Appendix). To mitigate the loss of mechanical integrity,
further studies are needed to investigate how to safeguard the bone with a
radioprotectant. Several radioprotectants have been considered for their
ability to preserve tissue properties following irradiation [4,49,60]. Based
on our results, we would recommend studies focused on radioprotectants which
can prevent or offset the fragmentation of collagen, as these types of
radioprotectants may preserve bone mechanics to a greater degree than those
which protect against non-enzymatic collagen crosslinks.

Our results also have implications for understanding the etiology of the
increased fracture risk associated with _in vivo_ radiation therapy treatment
for cancer [2,8,61–66]. We did not observe any change in mechanical behavior
for _ex vivo_ dose levels relevant to radiation therapy (i.e. 50 Gy), despite
an increase in collagen crosslinks. Thus, direct effects of radiation on the
collagen matrix from radiation therapy are not solely responsible for the
increased fracture risk observed clinically. From this, we can infer that the
cellular processes of bone remodeling due to _in vivo_ irradiation are likely
the root cause. Indeed, previous _in vivo_ irradiation studies of bone in a
murine model have shown reduced trabecular bone mass, number and connectivity
associated with hyperactive osteoclast activity [67–69]. Taken together with
our _ex vivo_ observations, cell-mediated changes in bone quantity, trabecular
microarchitecture, or tissue material quality are more plausible explanations
for the increased fracture risk from radiation therapy than direct changes to
the bone material.

In summary, we quantified the level of collagen fragmentation and non-
enzymatic collagen crosslinks in the organic matrix of murine whole-bones at
clinically-relevant _ex vivo_ radiation doses. Our results suggest that the
fragmentation of collagen — and not the accumulation of non-enzymatic collagen
crosslinks — was the primary molecular mechanism that caused the observed
monotonic mechanical degradation at 17,000 Gy and above, and cyclic mechanical
degradation at 5,000 Gy and above.

## Highlights.

  * _Ex vivo_ ionizing radiation of whole-bones caused a reduction in compressive monotonic strength and fatigue life.

  * Decreased strength was best explained by collagen fragmentation, not the accumulation of non-enzymatic collagen crosslinks.

  * Non-enzymatic collagen crosslinks may play a smaller role in degrading mechanical strength of bone than previously considered.

  * Irradiation has unique effects on cyclic behavior that are not manifested in static behavior.

## Acknowledgements

This study was supported by NASA Science & Technology Research Fellowship
NNX14AM56H (MMP), National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship
Program #1752814 (SRE), a NASA Space Biology PECASE (JSA), and grants from the
National Institutes of Health (K01AR069116, R21AR069804, R01AR07444) (SYT).
This research used resources of the Advanced Light Source, which is a DOE
Office of Science User Facility under contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231.
Computational resources were made available through the National Science
Foundation via XSEDE, Grant TG-MCA00N019 (TMK). The authors would like to
thank Saghi Sadoughi (UCB) for her assistance with finite element modeling,
Alfred Li (UCSF) for his micro-CT expertise, Dula Parkinson (LBNL) for his
support with the irradiation protocol, and Tamara Alliston (UCSF), Thomas
Willet (University of Waterloo), and Elumalai Rangasamy (Agilent Technologies)
for their guidance on the biochemical assays.

## 5\. Appendix: Supplemental Study

To gain insight into the effect of ionizing radiation between 1,000 and 17,000
Gy, we conducted an additional _ex vivo_ x-ray radiation experiment on excised
mouse lumbar vertebrae from 20-week old, female, C57BL/6J mice, randomly
assigned to a one-time _ex vivo_ radiation dose of either 0 (n = 4), 5,000 (n
= 5), or 10,000 Gy (n = 5). As detailed above, we measured mechanical
properties, collagen crosslinks, and collagen fragmentation (data not shown).
We observed compressive fatigue life to be lower for the irradiated groups,
being 18% (_p_ < 0.01) and 37% (_p_ < 0.0001) lower for 5,000 and 10,000 Gy
doses, respectively, compared to the control (5.0 ± 0.4 log(cycles)). We
detected no significant effect of radiation dose for any of the compressive
monotonic mechanical properties, either for strength (_p_ = 0.12), stiffness
(_p_ = 0.62), or maximum displacement (_p_ = 0.51). Collagen crosslinks
increased significantly for all irradiated groups, by 71% and 101% for 5,000
and 10,000 Gy, respectively (_p_ < 0.05). Collagen fragmentation was evident
for 5,000 Gy, observed as a significant decrease in the amount of nominally
sized collagen chains (~150 kDa) compared to the 0 Gy control (_p_ = 0.008);
data for the 10,000 Gy group was lost due to a processing error. These
findings suggest that doses well below sterilization standards (30,000 ± 5,000
Gy) and a proposed alternative (11,000 Gy) may compromise the mechanical
strength and collagen integrity of bone allografts, making them more
susceptible to failure under cyclic loading [4,5,59].

## Footnotes

**Publisher's Disclaimer:** This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that
has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are
providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo
copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is
published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production
process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

1

Abbreviations: Gy, Gray; Nf, Fatigue Life; εf, Strain-to-Failure; Kelastic,
Elastic Stiffness; AGEs, Advanced Glycation End Products; FU, Fluorescence
Unit;

Disclosures

TMK: Consultant for Amgen, AgNovos Healthcare, and O.N. Diagnostics; equity in
O.N. Diagnostics.

Conflict of Interest

All authors certify that there are no conflicts of interest related to the
work presented in this manuscript.

## 6 References

  * [1].Meixel AJ, Hauswald H, Delorme S, Jobke B, From radiation osteitis to osteoradionecrosis: incidence and MR morphology of radiation-induced sacral pathologies following pelvic radiotherapy, Eur. Radiol 28 (2018) 3550–3559. doi: 10.1007/s00330-018-5325-2. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00330-018-5325-2)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29476220/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur.%20Radiol&title=From%20radiation%20osteitis%20to%20osteoradionecrosis:%20incidence%20and%20MR%20morphology%20of%20radiation-induced%20sacral%20pathologies%20following%20pelvic%20radiotherapy&author=AJ%20Meixel&author=H%20Hauswald&author=S%20Delorme&author=B%20Jobke&volume=28&publication_year=2018&pages=3550-3559&pmid=29476220&doi=10.1007/s00330-018-5325-2&)]
  * [2].Wei RL, Jung BC, Manzano W, Sehgal V, Klempner SJ, Lee SP, Ramsinghani NS, Lall C, Bone mineral density loss in thoracic and lumbar vertebrae following radiation for abdominal cancers, Radiother. Oncol 118 (2016) 430–436. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2016.03.002. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radonc.2016.03.002)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26993414/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiother.%20Oncol&title=Bone%20mineral%20density%20loss%20in%20thoracic%20and%20lumbar%20vertebrae%20following%20radiation%20for%20abdominal%20cancers&author=RL%20Wei&author=BC%20Jung&author=W%20Manzano&author=V%20Sehgal&author=SJ%20Klempner&volume=118&publication_year=2016&pages=430-436&pmid=26993414&doi=10.1016/j.radonc.2016.03.002&)]
  * [3].Shih KK, Folkert MR, Kollmeier MA, Abu-Rustum NR, Sonoda Y, Leitao MM, Barakat RR, Alektiar KM, Pelvic insufficiency fractures in patients with cervical and endometrial cancer treated with postoperative pelvic radiation, Gynecol. Oncol 128 (2013) 540–543. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2012.12.021. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygyno.2012.12.021)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23262211/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gynecol.%20Oncol&title=Pelvic%20insufficiency%20fractures%20in%20patients%20with%20cervical%20and%20endometrial%20cancer%20treated%20with%20postoperative%20pelvic%20radiation&author=KK%20Shih&author=MR%20Folkert&author=MA%20Kollmeier&author=NR%20Abu-Rustum&author=Y%20Sonoda&volume=128&publication_year=2013&pages=540-543&pmid=23262211&doi=10.1016/j.ygyno.2012.12.021&)]
  * [4].Singh R, Singh D, Singh A, Radiation sterilization of tissue allografts: A review, World J. Radiol 8 (2016) 355. doi: 10.4329/wjr.v8.i4.355. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.4329/wjr.v8.i4.355)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4840193/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27158422/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=World%20J.%20Radiol&title=Radiation%20sterilization%20of%20tissue%20allografts:%20A%20review&author=R%20Singh&author=D%20Singh&author=A%20Singh&volume=8&publication_year=2016&pages=355&pmid=27158422&doi=10.4329/wjr.v8.i4.355&)]
  * [5].Campbell DG, Li P, Stephenson AJ, Oakeshott RD, Sterilization of HIV by gamma irradiation. A bone allograft model., Int. Orthop 18 (1994) 172–6. <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7927967>. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00192474)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7927967/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20Orthop&title=Sterilization%20of%20HIV%20by%20gamma%20irradiation.%20A%20bone%20allograft%20model.&author=DG%20Campbell&author=P%20Li&author=AJ%20Stephenson&author=RD%20Oakeshott&volume=18&publication_year=1994&pages=172-6&pmid=7927967&doi=10.1007/BF00192474&)]
  * [6].Okoukoni C, Farris M, Hughes RT, McTyre ER, Helis CA, Munley MT, Willey JS, Radiation-Induced Bone Toxicity, Curr. Stem Cell Reports 3 (2017) 333–341. doi: 10.1007/s40778-017-0099-z. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40778-017-0099-z)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr.%20Stem%20Cell%20Reports&title=Radiation-Induced%20Bone%20Toxicity&author=C%20Okoukoni&author=M%20Farris&author=RT%20Hughes&author=ER%20McTyre&author=CA%20Helis&volume=3&publication_year=2017&pages=333-341&doi=10.1007/s40778-017-0099-z&)]
  * [7].Bazire L, Xu H, Foy JP, Amessis M, Malhaire C, Cao K, De La Rochefordiere A, Kirova YM, Pelvic insufficiency fracture (PIF) incidence in patients treated with intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) for gynaecological or anal cancer: Single-institution experience and review of the literature, Br. J. Radiol 90 (2017). doi: 10.1259/bjr.20160885. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1259/bjr.20160885)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC5605110/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28291401/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br.%20J.%20Radiol&title=Pelvic%20insufficiency%20fracture%20\(PIF\)%20incidence%20in%20patients%20treated%20with%20intensity-modulated%20radiation%20therapy%20\(IMRT\)%20for%20gynaecological%20or%20anal%20cancer:%20Single-institution%20experience%20and%20review%20of%20the%20literature&author=L%20Bazire&author=H%20Xu&author=JP%20Foy&author=M%20Amessis&author=C%20Malhaire&volume=90&publication_year=2017&pmid=28291401&doi=10.1259/bjr.20160885&)]
  * [8].Baxter NN, Habermann EB, Tepper JE, Durham SB, Virnig BA, Risk of pelvic fractures in older women following pelvic irradiation, JAMA 294 (2005) 2587–2593. doi: 10.1001/jama.294.20.2587. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.294.20.2587)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16304072/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JAMA&title=Risk%20of%20pelvic%20fractures%20in%20older%20women%20following%20pelvic%20irradiation&author=NN%20Baxter&author=EB%20Habermann&author=JE%20Tepper&author=SB%20Durham&author=BA%20Virnig&volume=294&publication_year=2005&pages=2587-2593&pmid=16304072&doi=10.1001/jama.294.20.2587&)]
  * [9].Lietman SA, Tomford WW, Gebhardt MC, Springfield DS, Mankin HJ, Complications of irradiated allografts in orthopaedic tumor surgery., Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res 2000 (2000) 214–217. doi: 10.1097/00003086-200006000-00026. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/00003086-200006000-00026)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10853172/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20Orthop.%20Relat.%20Res&title=Complications%20of%20irradiated%20allografts%20in%20orthopaedic%20tumor%20surgery.&author=SA%20Lietman&author=WW%20Tomford&author=MC%20Gebhardt&author=DS%20Springfield&author=HJ%20Mankin&volume=2000&publication_year=2000&pages=214-217&pmid=10853172&doi=10.1097/00003086-200006000-00026&)]
  * [10].Burton B, Gaspar A, Josey D, Tupy J, Grynpas MD, Willett TL, Bone embrittlement and collagen modifications due to high-dose gamma-irradiation sterilization., Bone 61 (2014) 71–81. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2014.01.006. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2014.01.006)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24440514/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Bone%20embrittlement%20and%20collagen%20modifications%20due%20to%20high-dose%20gamma-irradiation%20sterilization.&author=B%20Burton&author=A%20Gaspar&author=D%20Josey&author=J%20Tupy&author=MD%20Grynpas&volume=61&publication_year=2014&pages=71-81&pmid=24440514&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2014.01.006&)]
  * [11].Currey JD, Foreman J, Laketic I, Mitchell J, Pegg DE, Reilly GC, Effects of ionizing radiation on the mechanical properties of human bone, J. Orthop. Res 15 (1997) 111–117. doi: 10.1002/jor.1100150116. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/jor.1100150116)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9066534/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Orthop.%20Res&title=Effects%20of%20ionizing%20radiation%20on%20the%20mechanical%20properties%20of%20human%20bone&author=JD%20Currey&author=J%20Foreman&author=I%20Laketic&author=J%20Mitchell&author=DE%20Pegg&volume=15&publication_year=1997&pages=111-117&pmid=9066534&doi=10.1002/jor.1100150116&)]
  * [12].Barth HD, Launey ME, MacDowell AA, Ager JW, Ritchie RO, On the effect of X-ray irradiation on the deformation and fracture behavior of human cortical bone, Bone 46 (2010) 1475–1485. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2010.02.025. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2010.02.025)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20206724/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=On%20the%20effect%20of%20X-ray%20irradiation%20on%20the%20deformation%20and%20fracture%20behavior%20of%20human%20cortical%20bone&author=HD%20Barth&author=ME%20Launey&author=AA%20MacDowell&author=JW%20Ager&author=RO%20Ritchie&volume=46&publication_year=2010&pages=1475-1485&pmid=20206724&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2010.02.025&)]
  * [13].Barth HD, Zimmermann EA, Schaible E, Tang SY, Alliston T, Ritchie RO, Characterization of the effects of x-ray irradiation on the hierarchical structure and mechanical properties of human cortical bone, Biomaterials 32 (2011) 8892–8904. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.08.013. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.08.013)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4405888/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21885114/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biomaterials&title=Characterization%20of%20the%20effects%20of%20x-ray%20irradiation%20on%20the%20hierarchical%20structure%20and%20mechanical%20properties%20of%20human%20cortical%20bone&author=HD%20Barth&author=EA%20Zimmermann&author=E%20Schaible&author=SY%20Tang&author=T%20Alliston&volume=32&publication_year=2011&pages=8892-8904&pmid=21885114&doi=10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.08.013&)]
  * [14].Nguyen H, Morgan DAF, Forwood MR, Sterilization of allograft bone: Effects of gamma irradiation on allograft biology and biomechanics, Cell Tissue Bank 8 (2007) 93–105. doi: 10.1007/s10561-006-9020-1. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10561-006-9020-1)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17063262/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Tissue%20Bank&title=Sterilization%20of%20allograft%20bone:%20Effects%20of%20gamma%20irradiation%20on%20allograft%20biology%20and%20biomechanics&author=H%20Nguyen&author=DAF%20Morgan&author=MR%20Forwood&volume=8&publication_year=2007&pages=93-105&pmid=17063262&doi=10.1007/s10561-006-9020-1&)]
  * [15].Akkus O, Rimnac CM, Fracture resistance of gamma radiation sterilized cortical bone allografts, J. Orthop. Res 19 (2001) 927–934. doi: 10.1016/S0736-0266(01)00004-3. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0736-0266\(01\)00004-3)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11562143/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Orthop.%20Res&title=Fracture%20resistance%20of%20gamma%20radiation%20sterilized%20cortical%20bone%20allografts&author=O%20Akkus&author=CM%20Rimnac&volume=19&publication_year=2001&pages=927-934&pmid=11562143&doi=10.1016/S0736-0266\(01\)00004-3&)]
  * [16].Zioupos P, Currey JD, Hamer AJ, The role of collagen in the declining mechanical properties of aging human cortical bone, J. Biomed. Mater. Res 45 (1999). doi:. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/\(SICI\)1097-4636\(199905\)45:2&#x00026;lt;108::AID-JBM5&#x00026;gt;3.0.CO;2-A)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10397964/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biomed.%20Mater.%20Res&title=The%20role%20of%20collagen%20in%20the%20declining%20mechanical%20properties%20of%20aging%20human%20cortical%20bone&author=P%20Zioupos&author=JD%20Currey&author=AJ%20Hamer&volume=45&publication_year=1999&pmid=10397964&doi=10.1002/\(SICI\)1097-4636\(199905\)45:2&#x00026;lt;108::AID-JBM5&#x00026;gt;3.0.CO;2-A&)]
  * [17].Nyman JS, Reyes M, Wang X, Effect of ultrastructural changes on the toughness of bone, Micron 36 (2005) 566–582. doi: 10.1016/j.micron.2005.07.004. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micron.2005.07.004)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16169742/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Micron&title=Effect%20of%20ultrastructural%20changes%20on%20the%20toughness%20of%20bone&author=JS%20Nyman&author=M%20Reyes&author=X%20Wang&volume=36&publication_year=2005&pages=566-582&pmid=16169742&doi=10.1016/j.micron.2005.07.004&)]
  * [18].Burstein AH, Zika JM, Heiple KG, Klein L, Contribution of collagen and mineral to the elastic-plastic properties of bone., J. Bone Joint Surg. Am 57 (1975) 956–961. [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1184645/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Bone%20Joint%20Surg.%20Am&title=Contribution%20of%20collagen%20and%20mineral%20to%20the%20elastic-plastic%20properties%20of%20bone.&author=AH%20Burstein&author=JM%20Zika&author=KG%20Heiple&author=L%20Klein&volume=57&publication_year=1975&pages=956-961&pmid=1184645&)]
  * [19].Colwell A, Hamer A, Blumsohn A, Eastell R, To determine the effects of ultraviolet light, natural light and ionizing radiation on pyridinium cross-links in bone and urine using high-performance liquid chromatography, Eur. J. Clin. Invest 26 (1996) 1107–1114. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2362.1996.460602.x. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2362.1996.460602.x)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9013086/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur.%20J.%20Clin.%20Invest&title=To%20determine%20the%20effects%20of%20ultraviolet%20light,%20natural%20light%20and%20ionizing%20radiation%20on%20pyridinium%20cross-links%20in%20bone%20and%20urine%20using%20high-performance%20liquid%20chromatography&author=A%20Colwell&author=A%20Hamer&author=A%20Blumsohn&author=R%20Eastell&volume=26&publication_year=1996&pages=1107-1114&pmid=9013086&doi=10.1046/j.1365-2362.1996.460602.x&)]
  * [20].Akkus O, Belaney RM, Sterilization by gamma radiation impairs the tensile fatigue life of cortical bone by two orders of magnitude, J. Orthop. Res 23 (2005) 1054–1058. doi: 10.1016/j.orthres.2005.03.003. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orthres.2005.03.003)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16140190/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Orthop.%20Res&title=Sterilization%20by%20gamma%20radiation%20impairs%20the%20tensile%20fatigue%20life%20of%20cortical%20bone%20by%20two%20orders%20of%20magnitude&author=O%20Akkus&author=RM%20Belaney&volume=23&publication_year=2005&pages=1054-1058&pmid=16140190&doi=10.1016/j.orthres.2005.03.003&)]
  * [21].Oest ME, Gong B, Esmonde-White K, Mann KA, Zimmerman ND, Damron TA, Morris MD, Parathyroid hormone attenuates radiation-induced increases in collagen crosslink ratio at periosteal surfaces of mouse tibia, Bone 86 (2016) 91–97. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2016.03.003. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2016.03.003)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4833661/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26960578/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Parathyroid%20hormone%20attenuates%20radiation-induced%20increases%20in%20collagen%20crosslink%20ratio%20at%20periosteal%20surfaces%20of%20mouse%20tibia&author=ME%20Oest&author=B%20Gong&author=K%20Esmonde-White&author=KA%20Mann&author=ND%20Zimmerman&volume=86&publication_year=2016&pages=91-97&pmid=26960578&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2016.03.003&)]
  * [22].Gong B, Oest ME, Mann KA, Damron TA, Morris MD, Raman spectroscopy demonstrates prolonged alteration of bone chemical composition following extremity localized irradiation, Bone 57 (2013) 252–258. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2013.08.014. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2013.08.014)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC3789379/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23978492/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Raman%20spectroscopy%20demonstrates%20prolonged%20alteration%20of%20bone%20chemical%20composition%20following%20extremity%20localized%20irradiation&author=B%20Gong&author=ME%20Oest&author=KA%20Mann&author=TA%20Damron&author=MD%20Morris&volume=57&publication_year=2013&pages=252-258&pmid=23978492&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2013.08.014&)]
  * [23].Bailey AJ, Rhodes DN, Cater CW, Irradiation-Induced Crosslinking of Collagen, Radiat. Res 22 (1964) 606–21. <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14201872>. [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14201872/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=Irradiation-Induced%20Crosslinking%20of%20Collagen&author=AJ%20Bailey&author=DN%20Rhodes&author=CW%20Cater&volume=22&publication_year=1964&pages=606-21&pmid=14201872&)]
  * [24].Zimmermann EA, Schaible E, Bale H, Barth HD, Tang SY, Reichert P, Busse B, Alliston T, Ager JW, Ritchie RO, Age-related changes in the plasticity and toughness of human cortical bone at multiple length scales, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 108 (2011) 14416–14421. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1209596109. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1209596109)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC3167515/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21873221/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc.%20Natl.%20Acad.%20Sci&title=Age-related%20changes%20in%20the%20plasticity%20and%20toughness%20of%20human%20cortical%20bone%20at%20multiple%20length%20scales&author=EA%20Zimmermann&author=E%20Schaible&author=H%20Bale&author=HD%20Barth&author=SY%20Tang&volume=108&publication_year=2011&pages=14416-14421&pmid=21873221&doi=10.1073/pnas.1209596109&)]
  * [25].Saito M, Marumo K, Effects of Collagen Crosslinking on Bone Material Properties in Health and Disease, Calcif. Tissue Int 97 (2015) 242–261. doi: 10.1007/s00223-015-9985-5. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00223-015-9985-5)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25791570/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Calcif.%20Tissue%20Int&title=Effects%20of%20Collagen%20Crosslinking%20on%20Bone%20Material%20Properties%20in%20Health%20and%20Disease&author=M%20Saito&author=K%20Marumo&volume=97&publication_year=2015&pages=242-261&pmid=25791570&doi=10.1007/s00223-015-9985-5&)]
  * [26].Karim L, Bouxsein ML, Effect of type 2 diabetes-related non-enzymatic glycation on bone biomechanical properties, Bone 82 (2016) 21–27. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.07.028. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2015.07.028)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4679472/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26211993/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Effect%20of%20type%202%20diabetes-related%20non-enzymatic%20glycation%20on%20bone%20biomechanical%20properties&author=L%20Karim&author=ML%20Bouxsein&volume=82&publication_year=2016&pages=21-27&pmid=26211993&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2015.07.028&)]
  * [27].Acevedo C, Sylvia M, Schaible E, Graham JL, Stanhope KL, Metz LN, Gludovatz B, Schwartz AV, Ritchie RO, Alliston TN, Havel PJ, Fields AJ, Contributions of Material Properties and Structure to Increased Bone Fragility for a Given Bone Mass in the UCD-T2DM Rat Model of Type 2 Diabetes, J. Bone Miner. Res 33 (2018) 1066–1075. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.3393. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.3393)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC6011658/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29342321/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Bone%20Miner.%20Res&title=Contributions%20of%20Material%20Properties%20and%20Structure%20to%20Increased%20Bone%20Fragility%20for%20a%20Given%20Bone%20Mass%20in%20the%20UCD-T2DM%20Rat%20Model%20of%20Type%202%20Diabetes&author=C%20Acevedo&author=M%20Sylvia&author=E%20Schaible&author=JL%20Graham&author=KL%20Stanhope&volume=33&publication_year=2018&pages=1066-1075&pmid=29342321&doi=10.1002/jbmr.3393&)]
  * [28].Farlay D, Armas L, Gineyts E, Akhter M, Recker R, Boivin G, Non-enzymatic glycation and degree of mineralization are higher in bone from fractured patients with Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus, J. Bone Miner. Res 31 (2016) 190–195. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2607.Non-enzymatic. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.2607.Non-enzymatic)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4876148/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26234180/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Bone%20Miner.%20Res&title=Non-enzymatic%20glycation%20and%20degree%20of%20mineralization%20are%20higher%20in%20bone%20from%20fractured%20patients%20with%20Type%201%20Diabetes%20Mellitus&author=D%20Farlay&author=L%20Armas&author=E%20Gineyts&author=M%20Akhter&author=R%20Recker&volume=31&publication_year=2016&pages=190-195&pmid=26234180&doi=10.1002/jbmr.2607.Non-enzymatic&)]
  * [29].Pendleton MM, Sadoughi S, Li A, O’Connell GD, Alwood JS, Keaveny TM, High-precision method for cyclic loading of small-animal vertebrae to assess bone quality, Bone Reports 9 (2018) 165–172. doi: 10.1016/j.bonr.2018.10.002. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bonr.2018.10.002)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC6222041/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30417036/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone%20Reports&title=High-precision%20method%20for%20cyclic%20loading%20of%20small-animal%20vertebrae%20to%20assess%20bone%20quality&author=MM%20Pendleton&author=S%20Sadoughi&author=A%20Li&author=GD%20O%E2%80%99Connell&author=JS%20Alwood&volume=9&publication_year=2018&pages=165-172&pmid=30417036&doi=10.1016/j.bonr.2018.10.002&)]
  * [30].Pendleton MM, Effects of Spaceflight- and Clinically-relevant Ionizing Radiation Exposure on Bone Biomechanics, University of California, Berkeley, 2018. [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Effects%20of%20Spaceflight-%20and%20Clinically-relevant%20Ionizing%20Radiation%20Exposure%20on%20Bone%20Biomechanics&author=MM%20Pendleton&publication_year=2018&)]
  * [31].Turner CH, Burr DB, Basic biomechanical measurements of bone: A tutorial, Bone 14 (1993) 595–608. doi: 10.1016/8756-3282(93)90081-K. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/8756-3282\(93\)90081-K)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8274302/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Basic%20biomechanical%20measurements%20of%20bone:%20A%20tutorial&author=CH%20Turner&author=DB%20Burr&volume=14&publication_year=1993&pages=595-608&pmid=8274302&doi=10.1016/8756-3282\(93\)90081-K&)]
  * [32].Knott L, Bailey AJ, Collagen cross-links in mineralizing tissues: A review of their chemistry, function, and clinical relevance, Bone 22 (1998) 181–187. doi: 10.1016/S8756-3282(97)00279-2. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S8756-3282\(97\)00279-2)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9514209/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Collagen%20cross-links%20in%20mineralizing%20tissues:%20A%20review%20of%20their%20chemistry,%20function,%20and%20clinical%20relevance&author=L%20Knott&author=AJ%20Bailey&volume=22&publication_year=1998&pages=181-187&pmid=9514209&doi=10.1016/S8756-3282\(97\)00279-2&)]
  * [33].Burr DB, Changes in bone matrix properties with aging, Bone 120 (2019) 85–93. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2018.10.010. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2018.10.010)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30315999/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Changes%20in%20bone%20matrix%20properties%20with%20aging&author=DB%20Burr&volume=120&publication_year=2019&pages=85-93&pmid=30315999&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2018.10.010&)]
  * [34].Bailey AJ, Molecular mechanisms of ageing in connective tissues, Mech. Ageing Dev 122 (2001) 735–755. doi: 10.1016/S0047-6374(01)00225-1. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0047-6374\(01\)00225-1)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11322995/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mech.%20Ageing%20Dev&title=Molecular%20mechanisms%20of%20ageing%20in%20connective%20tissues&author=AJ%20Bailey&volume=122&publication_year=2001&pages=735-755&pmid=11322995&doi=10.1016/S0047-6374\(01\)00225-1&)]
  * [35].Sell DR, Monnier VM, Isolation, purification and partial characterization of novel fluorophores from aging human insoluble collagen-rich tissue, Connect. Tissue Res 19 (1989) 77–92. doi: 10.3109/03008208909016816. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3109/03008208909016816)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2791558/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Connect.%20Tissue%20Res&title=Isolation,%20purification%20and%20partial%20characterization%20of%20novel%20fluorophores%20from%20aging%20human%20insoluble%20collagen-rich%20tissue&author=DR%20Sell&author=VM%20Monnier&volume=19&publication_year=1989&pages=77-92&pmid=2791558&doi=10.3109/03008208909016816&)]
  * [36].Tang SY, Zeenath U, Vashishth D, Effects of non-enzymatic glycation on cancellous bone fragility, Bone 40 (2007) 1144–1151. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2006.12.056. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2006.12.056)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4398019/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17257914/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Effects%20of%20non-enzymatic%20glycation%20on%20cancellous%20bone%20fragility&author=SY%20Tang&author=U%20Zeenath&author=D%20Vashishth&volume=40&publication_year=2007&pages=1144-1151&pmid=17257914&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2006.12.056&)]
  * [37].Akkus O, Belaney RM, Das P, Free radical scavenging alleviates the biomechanical impairment of gamma radiation sterilized bone tissue, J. Orthop. Res 23 (2005) 838–845. doi: 10.1016/j.orthres.2005.01.007. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orthres.2005.01.007)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16022998/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Orthop.%20Res&title=Free%20radical%20scavenging%20alleviates%20the%20biomechanical%20impairment%20of%20gamma%20radiation%20sterilized%20bone%20tissue&author=O%20Akkus&author=RM%20Belaney&author=P%20Das&volume=23&publication_year=2005&pages=838-845&pmid=16022998&doi=10.1016/j.orthres.2005.01.007&)]
  * [38].Islam A, Chapin K, Moore E, Ford J, Rimnac C, Akkus O, Gamma Radiation Sterilization Reduces the High-cycle Fatigue Life of Allograft Bone, Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res 474 (2016) 827–835. doi: 10.1007/s11999-015-4589-y. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11999-015-4589-y)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4746152/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26463571/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20Orthop.%20Relat.%20Res&title=Gamma%20Radiation%20Sterilization%20Reduces%20the%20High-cycle%20Fatigue%20Life%20of%20Allograft%20Bone&author=A%20Islam&author=K%20Chapin&author=E%20Moore&author=J%20Ford&author=C%20Rimnac&volume=474&publication_year=2016&pages=827-835&pmid=26463571&doi=10.1007/s11999-015-4589-y&)]
  * [39].Willett TL, Burton B, Woodside M, Wang Z, Gaspar A, Attia T, γ-Irradiation sterilized bone strengthened and toughened by ribose pre-treatment, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater 44 (2015) 147–155. doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2015.01.003. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmbbm.2015.01.003)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25637825/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Mech.%20Behav.%20Biomed.%20Mater&title=%CE%B3-Irradiation%20sterilized%20bone%20strengthened%20and%20toughened%20by%20ribose%20pre-treatment&author=TL%20Willett&author=B%20Burton&author=M%20Woodside&author=Z%20Wang&author=A%20Gaspar&volume=44&publication_year=2015&pages=147-155&pmid=25637825&doi=10.1016/j.jmbbm.2015.01.003&)]
  * [40].Anderson MJ, Keyak JH, Skinner HB, Compressive mechanical properties of human cancellous bone after gamma irradiation, J. Bone Jt. Surg 74 (1992) 747–752. <http://dx.doi.org/>. [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1624490/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Bone%20Jt.%20Surg&title=Compressive%20mechanical%20properties%20of%20human%20cancellous%20bone%20after%20gamma%20irradiation&author=MJ%20Anderson&author=JH%20Keyak&author=HB%20Skinner&volume=74&publication_year=1992&pages=747-752&pmid=1624490&)]
  * [41].Nyman JS, Roy A, Acuna RL, Gayle HJ, Reyes MJ, Tyler JH, Dean DD, Wang X, Age-related effect on the concentration of collagen crosslinks in human osteonal and interstitial bone tissue, Bone 39 (2006) 1210–1217. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2006.06.026. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2006.06.026)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC1847577/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16962838/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Age-related%20effect%20on%20the%20concentration%20of%20collagen%20crosslinks%20in%20human%20osteonal%20and%20interstitial%20bone%20tissue&author=JS%20Nyman&author=A%20Roy&author=RL%20Acuna&author=HJ%20Gayle&author=MJ%20Reyes&volume=39&publication_year=2006&pages=1210-1217&pmid=16962838&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2006.06.026&)]
  * [42].Tang SY, Allen MR, Phipps R, Burr DB, Vashishth D, Changes in non-enzymatic glycation and its association with altered mechanical properties following 1-year treatment with risedronate or alendronate, Osteoporos. Int 20 (2009) 887–894. doi: 10.1007/s00198-008-0754-4. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-008-0754-4)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC2733909/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18850239/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Osteoporos.%20Int&title=Changes%20in%20non-enzymatic%20glycation%20and%20its%20association%20with%20altered%20mechanical%20properties%20following%201-year%20treatment%20with%20risedronate%20or%20alendronate&author=SY%20Tang&author=MR%20Allen&author=R%20Phipps&author=DB%20Burr&author=D%20Vashishth&volume=20&publication_year=2009&pages=887-894&pmid=18850239&doi=10.1007/s00198-008-0754-4&)]
  * [43].Saito M, Fujii K, Soshi S, Tanaka T, Reductions in degree of mineralization and enzymatic collagen cross-links and increases in glycation-induced pentosidine in the femoral neck cortex in cases of femoral neck fracture, Osteoporos. Int 17 (2006) 986–995. doi: 10.1007/s00198-006-0087-0. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-006-0087-0)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16552468/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Osteoporos.%20Int&title=Reductions%20in%20degree%20of%20mineralization%20and%20enzymatic%20collagen%20cross-links%20and%20increases%20in%20glycation-induced%20pentosidine%20in%20the%20femoral%20neck%20cortex%20in%20cases%20of%20femoral%20neck%20fracture&author=M%20Saito&author=K%20Fujii&author=S%20Soshi&author=T%20Tanaka&volume=17&publication_year=2006&pages=986-995&pmid=16552468&doi=10.1007/s00198-006-0087-0&)]
  * [44].Janghorbani M, Van Dam RM, Willett WC, Hu FB, Systematic review of type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus and risk of fracture, Am. J. Epidemiol 166 (2007) 495–505. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwm106. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwm106)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17575306/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Epidemiol&title=Systematic%20review%20of%20type%201%20and%20type%202%20diabetes%20mellitus%20and%20risk%20of%20fracture&author=M%20Janghorbani&author=RM%20Van%20Dam&author=WC%20Willett&author=FB%20Hu&volume=166&publication_year=2007&pages=495-505&pmid=17575306&doi=10.1093/aje/kwm106&)]
  * [45].Farr JN, Khosla S, Determinants of bone strength and quality in diabetes mellitus in humans, Bone 82 (2016) 28–34. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.07.027. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2015.07.027)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4679576/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26211989/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Determinants%20of%20bone%20strength%20and%20quality%20in%20diabetes%20mellitus%20in%20humans&author=JN%20Farr&author=S%20Khosla&volume=82&publication_year=2016&pages=28-34&pmid=26211989&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2015.07.027&)]
  * [46].Rubin MR, Patsch JM, Assessment of bone turnover and bone quality in type 2 diabetic bone disease: current concepts and future directions., Bone Res 4 (2016) 16001. doi: 10.1038/boneres.2016.1. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/boneres.2016.1)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4802604/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27019762/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone%20Res&title=Assessment%20of%20bone%20turnover%20and%20bone%20quality%20in%20type%202%20diabetic%20bone%20disease:%20current%20concepts%20and%20future%20directions.&author=MR%20Rubin&author=JM%20Patsch&volume=4&publication_year=2016&pages=16001&pmid=27019762&doi=10.1038/boneres.2016.1&)]
  * [47].Vestergaard P, Discrepancies in bone mineral density and fracture risk in patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes--a meta-analysis., Osteoporos. Int 18 (2007) 427–44. doi: 10.1007/s00198-006-0253-4. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-006-0253-4)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17068657/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Osteoporos.%20Int&title=Discrepancies%20in%20bone%20mineral%20density%20and%20fracture%20risk%20in%20patients%20with%20type%201%20and%20type%202%20diabetes--a%20meta-analysis.&author=P%20Vestergaard&volume=18&publication_year=2007&pages=427-44&pmid=17068657&doi=10.1007/s00198-006-0253-4&)]
  * [48].Woodside M, Willett TL, Elastic–plastic fracture toughness and rising JR-curve behavior of cortical bone is partially protected from irradiation–sterilization-induced degradation by ribose protectant, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater 64 (2016) 53–64. doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2016.07.001. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmbbm.2016.07.001)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27479894/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Mech.%20Behav.%20Biomed.%20Mater&title=Elastic%E2%80%93plastic%20fracture%20toughness%20and%20rising%20JR-curve%20behavior%20of%20cortical%20bone%20is%20partially%20protected%20from%20irradiation%E2%80%93sterilization-induced%20degradation%20by%20ribose%20protectant&author=M%20Woodside&author=TL%20Willett&volume=64&publication_year=2016&pages=53-64&pmid=27479894&doi=10.1016/j.jmbbm.2016.07.001&)]
  * [49].Attia T, Woodside M, Minhas G, Lu XZ, Josey DS, Burrow T, Grynpas M, Willett TL, Development of a novel method for the strengthening and toughening of irradiation-sterilized bone allografts, Cell Tissue Bank 18 (2017) 323–334. doi: 10.1007/s10561-017-9634-5. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10561-017-9634-5)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28560495/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Tissue%20Bank&title=Development%20of%20a%20novel%20method%20for%20the%20strengthening%20and%20toughening%20of%20irradiation-sterilized%20bone%20allografts&author=T%20Attia&author=M%20Woodside&author=G%20Minhas&author=XZ%20Lu&author=DS%20Josey&volume=18&publication_year=2017&pages=323-334&pmid=28560495&doi=10.1007/s10561-017-9634-5&)]
  * [50].Willett TL, Dapaah DY, Uppuganti S, Granke M, Nyman JS, Bone collagen network integrity and transverse fracture toughness of human cortical bone, Bone 120 (2019) 187–193. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2018.10.024. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2018.10.024)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC6360115/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30394355/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Bone%20collagen%20network%20integrity%20and%20transverse%20fracture%20toughness%20of%20human%20cortical%20bone&author=TL%20Willett&author=DY%20Dapaah&author=S%20Uppuganti&author=M%20Granke&author=JS%20Nyman&volume=120&publication_year=2019&pages=187-193&pmid=30394355&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2018.10.024&)]
  * [51].Tüfekci K, Kayacan R, Kurbanoǧlu C, Effects of gamma radiation sterilization and strain rate on compressive behavior of equine cortical bone, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater 34 (2014) 231–242. doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2014.02.004. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmbbm.2014.02.004)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24607761/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Mech.%20Behav.%20Biomed.%20Mater&title=Effects%20of%20gamma%20radiation%20sterilization%20and%20strain%20rate%20on%20compressive%20behavior%20of%20equine%20cortical%20bone&author=K%20T%C3%BCfekci&author=R%20Kayacan&author=C%20Kurbano%C7%A7lu&volume=34&publication_year=2014&pages=231-242&pmid=24607761&doi=10.1016/j.jmbbm.2014.02.004&)]
  * [52].Mitchell EJ, Stawarz AM, Kayacan R, Rimnac CM, The effect of gamma radiation sterilization on the fatigue crack propagation resistance of human cortical bone, J. Bone Jt. Surg. - Ser. A 86 (2004) 2648–2657. doi: 10.2106/00004623-200412000-00010. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.2106/00004623-200412000-00010)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15590849/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Bone%20Jt.%20Surg.%20-%20Ser.%20A&title=The%20effect%20of%20gamma%20radiation%20sterilization%20on%20the%20fatigue%20crack%20propagation%20resistance%20of%20human%20cortical%20bone&author=EJ%20Mitchell&author=AM%20Stawarz&author=R%20Kayacan&author=CM%20Rimnac&volume=86&publication_year=2004&pages=2648-2657&pmid=15590849&doi=10.2106/00004623-200412000-00010&)]
  * [53].Hamer AJ, Strachan JR, Black MM, Ibbotson CJ, Stockley I, Elson RA, BIOMECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF CORTICAL ALLOGRAFT BONE USING A NEW METHOD OF BONE STRENGTH MEASUREMENT, J. Bone Joint Surg. Br 78-B (1996) 363–368. doi: 10.1302/0301-620X.78B3.0780363. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1302/0301-620X.78B3.0780363)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8636167/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Bone%20Joint%20Surg.%20Br&title=BIOMECHANICAL%20PROPERTIES%20OF%20CORTICAL%20ALLOGRAFT%20BONE%20USING%20A%20NEW%20METHOD%20OF%20BONE%20STRENGTH%20MEASUREMENT&author=AJ%20Hamer&author=JR%20Strachan&author=MM%20Black&author=CJ%20Ibbotson&author=I%20Stockley&volume=78-B&publication_year=1996&pages=363-368&pmid=8636167&doi=10.1302/0301-620X.78B3.0780363&)]
  * [54].Cornu O, Banse X, Docquier P-L, Luyckx S, Delloye CH, Synergetic effect of freeze-drying and gamma irradiation on the mechanical properties of human cancellous bone, J. Ortho 18 (2000) 426–431. doi: 10.1007/s10561-010-9209-1. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10561-010-9209-1)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10937629/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Ortho&title=Synergetic%20effect%20of%20freeze-drying%20and%20gamma%20irradiation%20on%20the%20mechanical%20properties%20of%20human%20cancellous%20bone&author=O%20Cornu&author=X%20Banse&author=P-L%20Docquier&author=S%20Luyckx&author=CH%20Delloye&volume=18&publication_year=2000&pages=426-431&pmid=10937629&doi=10.1007/s10561-010-9209-1&)]
  * [55].Russell N, Rives A, Bertollo N, Pelletier MH, Walsh WR, The effect of sterilization on the dynamic mechanical properties of paired rabbit cortical bone, J. Biomech 46 (2013) 1670–1675. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2013.04.006. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2013.04.006)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23664240/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biomech&title=The%20effect%20of%20sterilization%20on%20the%20dynamic%20mechanical%20properties%20of%20paired%20rabbit%20cortical%20bone&author=N%20Russell&author=A%20Rives&author=N%20Bertollo&author=MH%20Pelletier&author=WR%20Walsh&volume=46&publication_year=2013&pages=1670-1675&pmid=23664240&doi=10.1016/j.jbiomech.2013.04.006&)]
  * [56].Overgaard M, Spontaneous radiation-induced rib fractures in breast cancer patients treated with postmastectomy irradiation-a clinical radiobiological analysis of the influence of fraction size and dose-response relationships on late bone damage, Acta Oncol. (Madr) 27 (1988) 117–122. doi: 10.3109/02841868809090331. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3109/02841868809090331)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3390342/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Acta%20Oncol.%20\(Madr\)&title=Spontaneous%20radiation-induced%20rib%20fractures%20in%20breast%20cancer%20patients%20treated%20with%20postmastectomy%20irradiation-a%20clinical%20radiobiological%20analysis%20of%20the%20influence%20of%20fraction%20size%20and%20dose-response%20relationships%20on%20late%20bone%20damage&author=M%20Overgaard&volume=27&publication_year=1988&pages=117-122&pmid=3390342&doi=10.3109/02841868809090331&)]
  * [57].Oh D, Huh SJ, Insufficiency fracture after radiation therapy, Radiat. Oncol. J 32 (2014) 213–220. doi: 10.3857/roj.2014.32.4.213. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3857/roj.2014.32.4.213)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4282995/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25568849/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Oncol.%20J&title=Insufficiency%20fracture%20after%20radiation%20therapy&author=D%20Oh&author=SJ%20Huh&volume=32&publication_year=2014&pages=213-220&pmid=25568849&doi=10.3857/roj.2014.32.4.213&)]
  * [58].Shimoyama T, Katagiri H, Harada H, Murata H, Wasa J, Hosaka S, Suzuki T, Takahashi M, Asakura H, Nishimura T, Yamada H, Fracture after radiation therapy for femoral metastasis: Incidence, timing and clinical features, J. Radiat. Res 58 (2017) 661–668. doi: 10.1093/jrr/rrx038. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jrr/rrx038)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC5737329/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28992299/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Radiat.%20Res&title=Fracture%20after%20radiation%20therapy%20for%20femoral%20metastasis:%20Incidence,%20timing%20and%20clinical%20features&author=T%20Shimoyama&author=H%20Katagiri&author=H%20Harada&author=H%20Murata&author=J%20Wasa&volume=58&publication_year=2017&pages=661-668&pmid=28992299&doi=10.1093/jrr/rrx038&)]
  * [59].Nguyen H, Morgan DAF, Forwood MR, Validation of 11 kGy as a Radiation Sterilization Dose for Frozen Bone Allografts, J. Arthroplasty 26 (2011) 303–308. doi: 10.1016/j.arth.2010.03.032. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arth.2010.03.032)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20570097/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Arthroplasty&title=Validation%20of%2011%20kGy%20as%20a%20Radiation%20Sterilization%20Dose%20for%20Frozen%20Bone%20Allografts&author=H%20Nguyen&author=DAF%20Morgan&author=MR%20Forwood&volume=26&publication_year=2011&pages=303-308&pmid=20570097&doi=10.1016/j.arth.2010.03.032&)]
  * [60].Allaveisi F, Hashemi B, Mortazavi SMJ, Radioprotective effect of N-acetyl-L-cysteine free radical scavenger on compressive mechanical properties of the gamma sterilized cortical bone of bovine femur, Cell Tissue Bank 16 (2015) 97–108. doi: 10.1007/s10561-014-9446-9. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10561-014-9446-9)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24737302/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Tissue%20Bank&title=Radioprotective%20effect%20of%20N-acetyl-L-cysteine%20free%20radical%20scavenger%20on%20compressive%20mechanical%20properties%20of%20the%20gamma%20sterilized%20cortical%20bone%20of%20bovine%20femur&author=F%20Allaveisi&author=B%20Hashemi&author=SMJ%20Mortazavi&volume=16&publication_year=2015&pages=97-108&pmid=24737302&doi=10.1007/s10561-014-9446-9&)]
  * [61].Yaprak G, Gemici C, Temizkan S, Ozdemir S, Dogan BC, Seseogullari OO, Osteoporosis development and vertebral fractures after abdominal irradiation in patients with gastric cancer., BMC Cancer 18 (2018) 972. doi: 10.1186/s12885-018-4899-z. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-018-4899-z)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC6182865/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30309324/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Cancer&title=Osteoporosis%20development%20and%20vertebral%20fractures%20after%20abdominal%20irradiation%20in%20patients%20with%20gastric%20cancer.&author=G%20Yaprak&author=C%20Gemici&author=S%20Temizkan&author=S%20Ozdemir&author=BC%20Dogan&volume=18&publication_year=2018&pages=972&pmid=30309324&doi=10.1186/s12885-018-4899-z&)]
  * [62].Elliott SP, Jarosek SL, Alanee SR, Konety BR, Dusenbery KE, Virnig BA, Three-dimensional external beam radiotherapy for prostate cancer increases the risk of hip fracture, Cancer 117 (2011) 4557–4565. doi: 10.1002/cncr.25994. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.25994)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC3135749/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21412999/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer&title=Three-dimensional%20external%20beam%20radiotherapy%20for%20prostate%20cancer%20increases%20the%20risk%20of%20hip%20fracture&author=SP%20Elliott&author=SL%20Jarosek&author=SR%20Alanee&author=BR%20Konety&author=KE%20Dusenbery&volume=117&publication_year=2011&pages=4557-4565&pmid=21412999&doi=10.1002/cncr.25994&)]
  * [63].Schmeler KM, Jhingran A, Iyer RB, Sun CC, Eifel PJ, Soliman PT, Ramirez PT, Frumovitz M, Bodurka DC, Sood AK, Pelvic fractures after radiotherapy for cervical cancer: Implications for survivors, Cancer 116 (2010) 625–630. doi: 10.1002/cncr.24811. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.24811)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC5084848/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20052724/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer&title=Pelvic%20fractures%20after%20radiotherapy%20for%20cervical%20cancer:%20Implications%20for%20survivors&author=KM%20Schmeler&author=A%20Jhingran&author=RB%20Iyer&author=CC%20Sun&author=PJ%20Eifel&volume=116&publication_year=2010&pages=625-630&pmid=20052724&doi=10.1002/cncr.24811&)]
  * [64].Uezono H, Tsujino K, Moriki K, Nagano F, Ota Y, Sasaki R, Soejima T, Pelvic insufficiency fracture after definitive radiotherapy for uterine cervical cancer: retrospective analysis of risk factors, J. Radiat. Res 54 (2013) 1102–1109. doi: 10.1093/jrr/rrt055. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jrr/rrt055)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC3823778/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23685668/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Radiat.%20Res&title=Pelvic%20insufficiency%20fracture%20after%20definitive%20radiotherapy%20for%20uterine%20cervical%20cancer:%20retrospective%20analysis%20of%20risk%20factors&author=H%20Uezono&author=K%20Tsujino&author=K%20Moriki&author=F%20Nagano&author=Y%20Ota&volume=54&publication_year=2013&pages=1102-1109&pmid=23685668&doi=10.1093/jrr/rrt055&)]
  * [65].Hui SK, Arentsen L, Wilcox A, Shanley R, Yee D, Ghebre R, Spatial and temporal fracture pattern in breast and gynecologic cancer survivors, J. Cancer 6 (2015) 66–69. doi: 10.7150/jca.10288. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.7150/jca.10288)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4278916/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25553090/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Cancer&title=Spatial%20and%20temporal%20fracture%20pattern%20in%20breast%20and%20gynecologic%20cancer%20survivors&author=SK%20Hui&author=L%20Arentsen&author=A%20Wilcox&author=R%20Shanley&author=D%20Yee&volume=6&publication_year=2015&pages=66-69&pmid=25553090&doi=10.7150/jca.10288&)]
  * [66].Otani K, Teshima T, Ito Y, Kawaguchi Y, Konishi K, Takahashi H, Ohigashi H, Oshima K, Araki N, Nishiyama K, Ishikawa O, Risk factors for vertebral compression fractures in preoperative chemoradiotherapy with gemcitabine for pancreatic cancer, Radiother. Oncol 118 (2016) 424–429. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2016.01.006. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radonc.2016.01.006)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26806264/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiother.%20Oncol&title=Risk%20factors%20for%20vertebral%20compression%20fractures%20in%20preoperative%20chemoradiotherapy%20with%20gemcitabine%20for%20pancreatic%20cancer&author=K%20Otani&author=T%20Teshima&author=Y%20Ito&author=Y%20Kawaguchi&author=K%20Konishi&volume=118&publication_year=2016&pages=424-429&pmid=26806264&doi=10.1016/j.radonc.2016.01.006&)]
  * [67].Oest ME, Policastro CG, Mann KA, Zimmerman ND, Damron TA, Longitudinal Effects of Single Hindlimb Radiation Therapy on Bone Strength and Morphology at Local and Contralateral Sites, J. Bone Miner. Res 33 (2018) 99–112. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.3289. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.3289)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC5776033/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28902435/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Bone%20Miner.%20Res&title=Longitudinal%20Effects%20of%20Single%20Hindlimb%20Radiation%20Therapy%20on%20Bone%20Strength%20and%20Morphology%20at%20Local%20and%20Contralateral%20Sites&author=ME%20Oest&author=CG%20Policastro&author=KA%20Mann&author=ND%20Zimmerman&author=TA%20Damron&volume=33&publication_year=2018&pages=99-112&pmid=28902435&doi=10.1002/jbmr.3289&)]
  * [68].Kondo H, Searby ND, Mojarrab R, Phillips J, Alwood JS, Yumoto K, Almeida EAC, Limoli CL, Globus RK, Total-body irradiation of postpubertal mice with (137)Cs acutely compromises the microarchitecture of cancellous bone and increases osteoclasts., Radiat. Res 171 (2009) 283–289. doi: 10.1667/RR1463.1. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR1463.1)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19267555/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=Total-body%20irradiation%20of%20postpubertal%20mice%20with%20\(137\)Cs%20acutely%20compromises%20the%20microarchitecture%20of%20cancellous%20bone%20and%20increases%20osteoclasts.&author=H%20Kondo&author=ND%20Searby&author=R%20Mojarrab&author=J%20Phillips&author=JS%20Alwood&volume=171&publication_year=2009&pages=283-289&pmid=19267555&doi=10.1667/RR1463.1&)]
  * [69].Willey JS, Lloyd SAJ, Nelson GA, Bateman TA, Ionizing radiation and bone loss: Space exploration and clinical therapy applications, Clin. Rev. Bone Miner. Metab 9 (2011) 54–62. doi: 10.1007/s12018-011-9092-8. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12018-011-9092-8)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC3401480/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22826690/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20Rev.%20Bone%20Miner.%20Metab&title=Ionizing%20radiation%20and%20bone%20loss:%20Space%20exploration%20and%20clinical%20therapy%20applications&author=JS%20Willey&author=SAJ%20Lloyd&author=GA%20Nelson&author=TA%20Bateman&volume=9&publication_year=2011&pages=54-62&pmid=22826690&doi=10.1007/s12018-011-9092-8&)]

