Int J Mol Sci

. 2021 Aug 23;22(16):9088. doi:
[10.3390/ijms22169088](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22169088)

  * [Search in PMC](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/search/?term=%22Int%20J%20Mol%20Sci%22%5Bjour%5D)
  * [Search in PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Int%20J%20Mol%20Sci%22%5Bjour%5D)
  * [View in NLM Catalog](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nlmcatalog?term=%22Int%20J%20Mol%20Sci%22%5BTitle%20Abbreviation%5D)
  * [Add to search](?term=%22Int%20J%20Mol%20Sci%22%5Bjour%5D)

# Spaceflight Modulates the Expression of Key Oxidative Stress and Cell Cycle
Related Genes in Heart

[Akhilesh
Kumar](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Kumar%20A%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Akhilesh Kumar

1Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Mail Stop 288-2,
Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA; akhilesh482@gmail.com (A.K.); e.almeida@nasa.gov
(E.A.C.A.)

Find articles by [Akhilesh
Kumar](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Kumar%20A%22%5BAuthor%5D)

1,†, [Candice G T
Tahimic](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Tahimic%20CGT%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Candice G T Tahimic

2Department of Biology, University of North Florida, Jacksonville, FL 32224,
USA; c.tahimic@unf.edu

Find articles by [Candice G T
Tahimic](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Tahimic%20CGT%22%5BAuthor%5D)

2,†, [Eduardo A C
Almeida](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Almeida%20EAC%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Eduardo A C Almeida

1Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Mail Stop 288-2,
Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA; akhilesh482@gmail.com (A.K.); e.almeida@nasa.gov
(E.A.C.A.)

Find articles by [Eduardo A C
Almeida](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Almeida%20EAC%22%5BAuthor%5D)

1, [Ruth K
Globus](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Globus%20RK%22%5BAuthor%5D)

### Ruth K Globus

1Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Mail Stop 288-2,
Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA; akhilesh482@gmail.com (A.K.); e.almeida@nasa.gov
(E.A.C.A.)

Find articles by [Ruth K
Globus](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Globus%20RK%22%5BAuthor%5D)

1,*

Editors: Melpo Christofidou-Solomidou, Thomas J Goodwin

  * Author information
  * Article notes
  * Copyright and License information

1Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Mail Stop 288-2,
Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA; akhilesh482@gmail.com (A.K.); e.almeida@nasa.gov
(E.A.C.A.)

2Department of Biology, University of North Florida, Jacksonville, FL 32224,
USA; c.tahimic@unf.edu

*

Correspondence: ruthglobus@yahoo.com

†

Equal contribution.

#### Roles

**Melpo Christofidou-Solomidou** : Academic Editor

**Thomas J Goodwin** : Academic Editor

Received 2021 Jul 15; Accepted 2021 Aug 19; Collection date 2021 Aug.

© 2021 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/>).

[PMC Copyright notice](/about/copyright/)

PMCID: PMC8396460 PMID: [34445793](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34445793/)

## Abstract

Spaceflight causes cardiovascular changes due to microgravity-induced
redistribution of body fluids and musculoskeletal unloading. Cardiac
deconditioning and atrophy on Earth are associated with altered _Trp53_ and
oxidative stress-related pathways, but the effects of spaceflight on cardiac
changes at the molecular level are less understood. We tested the hypothesis
that spaceflight alters the expression of key genes related to stress response
pathways, which may contribute to cardiovascular deconditioning during
extended spaceflight. Mice were exposed to spaceflight for 15 days or
maintained on Earth (ground control). Ventricle tissue was harvested starting
~3 h post-landing. We measured expression of select genes implicated in
oxidative stress pathways and _Trp53_ signaling by quantitative PCR. Cardiac
expression levels of 37 of 168 genes tested were altered after spaceflight.
Spaceflight downregulated transcription factor, _Nfe2l2 (Nrf2)_ , upregulated
_Nox1_ and downregulated _Ptgs2_ , suggesting a persistent increase in
oxidative stress-related target genes. Spaceflight also substantially
upregulated _Cdkn1a_ (_p21_) and cell cycle/apoptosis-related gene _Myc_ , and
downregulated the inflammatory response gene _Tnf_. There were no changes in
apoptosis-related genes such as _Trp53_. Spaceflight altered the expression of
genes regulating redox balance, cell cycle and senescence in cardiac tissue of
mice. Thus, spaceflight may contribute to cardiac dysfunction due to oxidative
stress.

**Keywords:** spaceflight, microgravity, heart, gene expression, oxidative
stress, _Nfe2l2_ , NADPH oxidase, _Ptgs2_ , _Cdkn1a_ , _Myc_

## 1\. Introduction

Responses to spaceflight include cardiovascular deficits, loss of bone and
muscle mass, compromised immune function, chromosomal aberrations and
metabolic changes [1,2,3]. With future lunar and interplanetary space
missions, astronauts will stay in space for longer periods, presenting
increased cardiovascular risk to the crew. Therefore, a better understanding
of molecular mechanisms that mediate physiological responses to the space
environment is needed.

Entering into microgravity causes a cephalad shift of body fluids which leads
to increased heart stroke volume, a rise in left ventricular end diastolic
dimensions and a fluid shift between the vasculature and interstitium [4,5,6].
The fluid shift invokes compensatory endocrine and renal mechanisms [6]. These
alterations can diminish the capability of the heart to cope with
gravitational stress immediately after returning to Earth, leading to
orthostatic intolerance, as previously documented in some astronauts [7].

Gravitational unloading in space also contributes to cardiovascular
deconditioning [8], despite vigorous on-orbit exercise programs implemented on
the International Space Station (ISS). Both spaceflight and head-down-tilt bed
rest, a ground-based model for human spaceflight, can cause reduced plasma
volume and left ventricular atrophy [9,10]. A reduction in myocardial
interstitial fluid may contribute to lower myocardial mass following
microgravity exposure [11]. In rodents, 14 days of spaceflight was reported to
reduce cardiac myocyte size relative to ground controls, which is consistent
with cardiac atrophy [12]. In contrast, spaceflight for one week did not
affect cardiac mass [13], although it is possible that this period is too
short to cause demonstrable cardiac atrophy. Hindlimb unloading (HU), a
ground-based rodent model for simulating weightlessness, is reported to cause
cardiac atrophy in some studies [14,15], but not in others [13], thus further
work in this area is needed.

In addition to gravitational unloading, long term habitation in space will
expose astronauts to low doses of ionizing radiation, which may contribute to
both cardiac and vascular changes in oxidative pathways leading to tissue
dysfunction [16,17,18]. In fact, spaceflight can cause substantial changes in
expression of genes and biomarkers related to metabolic and oxidative stress
pathways in various tissues of both astronauts and animals
[19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27]. The relative contributions of the various
complex factors of habitation in space, including microgravity and ionizing
radiation, to observed changes in oxidative stress-related pathways are not
yet understood.

Activation of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis signal transduction pathways are
major stress responses important for defending against many physiological and
environmental challenges, including tissue oxidative stress. Spaceflight can
alter expression of various cell cycle arrest and apoptosis regulatory genes
[28,29] including CDKN1A (also known as P21), a cyclin dependent kinase
inhibitor that mediates cell cycle arrest via cyclin interactions and
apoptosis via TRP53. In addition, CDKN1A/P21 is a negative regulator of tissue
regeneration in mammals, and is known to interact with NFE2L2 (aka NRF2), a
master transcriptional regulator of oxidative defense genes. Spaceflight
elevates _Cdkn1a_ expression in bone tissue [30], liver and kidney [31] as
well as cultured cells [29], implicating activation of CDKN1A as a pathway
invoked in multiple tissues in response to the space environment.

We hypothesized that spaceflight leads to activation of oxidative stress and
cell cycle/apoptosis-related pathways in the heart. To begin to test this
hypothesis, we used thematic PCR arrays to identify the changes in expression
levels of genes related to oxidative stress and cell cycle/apoptosis (_Trp53_)
signal transduction pathways in mice exposed to 15 days of spaceflight on the
STS-131 space shuttle mission. Our gene expression findings in heart are novel
and consistent with activation of several molecular pathways, including those
related to oxidative stress, cell cycle regulation, inflammation and DNA
damage repair, which ultimately may contribute to cardiac dysfunction during
long duration spaceflight.

## 2\. Results

### 2.1. Body Mass of Animals Pre- and Post-Flight

Immediately after landing, all flight (FLT) and ground (GRD) control mice were
determined to be in good condition by veterinary examination. Figure 1 shows
the schematic of the experiment design and workflow. The average weight loss
of FLT mice over the duration of the experiment was 2.0 g (−9.1%, SD = 2.1 g,
_p_ = 0.013) whereas GRD control mice lost an average of 0.7 g (−3.4%, SD =
0.9 g, _p_ = 0.096); the difference in body weight loss averages for FLT
versus GRD was not significant (_p_ = 0.143). FLT habitats showed an average
of 10% less food remaining, and 24% less water remaining than GRD habitats.
However, measured values for food and water utilization after flight may not
precisely reflect actual consumption by mice due to possible differences in
food breakdown and water spillage in FLT versus GRD habitats.

#### Figure 1.

[![Figure
1](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/5f11/8396460/e8e9fc53bbd9/ijms-22-09088-g001.jpg)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=8396460_ijms-22-09088-g001.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/ijms-22-09088-f001/)

Schematic diagram of experiment design and workflow.

### 2.2. Spaceflight Altered Expression of Oxidative Stress Related Genes

Comparable quantities (average of 38.5 μg RNA per tissue sample) and high
qualities of total RNA were obtained from all the FLT and GRD samples. To
determine if spaceflight altered the expression of genes regulating redox
balance in cardiac tissue, oxidative stress PCR array was performed on 84
genes related to oxidative metabolism (Supplementary Table S1), and this data
set was supplemented with real time PCR analysis of _Nfe2l2_ expression levels
(Figure 2). Gene expression levels of FLT and GRD controls showed a trend
towards upregulation of a majority of those genes which were altered by
spaceflight (Table 1). Out of the 84 genes on the array, 11 genes were
upregulated and 3 genes were downregulated in FLT samples relative to GRD (_p_
< 0.05) (Table 1).

#### Figure 2.

[![Figure
2](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/5f11/8396460/9c2e698fbaae/ijms-22-09088-g002.jpg)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=8396460_ijms-22-09088-g002.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/ijms-22-09088-f002/)

Normalized expression levels of _Nfe2l2_ as measured by a separate RT-PCR
assay. Each data point is shown. The middle lines indicate the geometric mean
(normalized expression of 1 for Ground Control and 0.42 for Spaceflight
group). Outer lines show the 95% confidence intervals. * Statistically
significant by Mann–Whitney U test at _p_ < 0.05, n = 4. The log2 (linear)
normalized expression from the Ground Control and Flight groups were used in
the Mann–Whitney U test.

#### Table 1.

Spaceflight altered the expression of genes involved in oxidative stress
pathway. Expression levels are represented as fold regulation in spaceflight
versus ground controls (FLT versus GRD). Shown are 14 differentially regulated
genes out of a panel of 84 genes related to the oxidative stress response as
measured by RT-PCR. Of these, 11 were upregulated while three were
downregulated. The change in expression levels of these genes were found to be
statistically significant by Mann–Whitney U test at _p_ < 0.05, n = 4.

Gene Symbol | Gene Name | Fold Regulation  
---|---|---  
_Nox1_ | NADPH oxidase 1 | 6.62  
_Tpo_ | Thyroid peroxidase | 2.35  
_Slc41a3_ | Solute carrier family 41, member 3 | 1.97  
_Txnip_ | Thioredoxin interacting protein | 1.94  
_Prnp_ | Prion protein | 1.44  
_Txnrd3_ | Thioredoxin reductase 3 | 1.43  
_Gsr_ | Glutathione reductase | 1.31  
_Prdx6_ | Peroxiredoxin 6 | 1.23  
_Cat_ | Catalase | 1.20  
_Xpa_ | Xeroderma pigmentosum, complementation group A | 1.18  
_Sod1_ | Superoxide dismutase 1, soluble | 1.18  
_Ncf2_ | Neutrophil cytosolic factor 2 | −1.49  
_Fancc_ | Fanconi anemia, complementation group C | −1.62  
_Ptgs2_ | Prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 | −3.44  
  
[Open in a new tab](table/ijms-22-09088-t001/)

Specifically, there was a marked 6.6-fold upregulation in expression of NADPH
oxidase 1 (_Nox1_), suggesting an increase in production of superoxide and/or
hydrogen peroxide. Additionally, expression of Prostaglandin endoperoxidase
synthase 2 (_Ptgs2_), which acts as peroxidase, was downregulated by 3.4-fold.
The upregulation of _Nox1_ and downregulation of _Ptgs2_ may reflect elevated
oxidative stress within heart tissue of FLT mice relative to GRD controls. In
addition, _Txnip_ was upregulated by 1.9-fold and _Fancc_ was downregulated
1.6-fold in FLT samples. _Ncf2_ , which codes for a component of the NADPH
oxidase complex that generates superoxide, was moderately downregulated by
spaceflight (−1.5-fold). Other antioxidant genes (_Sod1_ , _Cat_ , _Prdx6_ ,
_Gsr_ , _Tpo_ , _Txnrd3_ , _Slc41a3_) and oxidative stress-responsive genes
(_Xpa_ , _Prnp_) were moderately affected by spaceflight (1.2-2.4 fold, _p_ <
0.05) (Table 1). There were no changes in the expression levels of 12 genes
related to oxygen transport (Supplementary Table S1). In contrast, there was a
2.4-fold reduction in expression of the global transcription factor, _Nfe2l2_
, in FLT compared to GRD animals (Figure 2). Thus, the expression of redox-
related genes was differentially regulated as a consequence of exposure to the
spaceflight environment.

### 2.3. Spaceflight Altered Expression of Cell Cycle/Proliferation Related
Genes

The expression levels of 84 genes involved cell cycle and apoptosis signal
transduction were analyzed by _p53_ Signaling Pathway PCR array (Supplementary
Table S2). Out of 84 genes, 13 genes were upregulated and 10 genes were
downregulated in FLT compared to GRD controls (Table 2, _p_ < 0.05). Results
show that genes related to cell cycle regulation were altered due to
spaceflight. Specifically, cell cycle inhibitors such as _Cdkn1a_ were
upregulated 6.8-fold while _Cdk1_ was downregulated 4.1-fold, suggesting
diminished growth and proliferation signals in FLT samples compared to GRD.
_Myc_ was upregulated 3.9-fold (_p_ < 0.05). Genes involved in inflammatory
responses, including _Tnf_ , _Tnfrsf10b_ (Tnf receptor superfamily, member 10)
and _Traf1_ , were downregulated (9.9-, 1.9- and 2.3-fold decrease,
respectively) in spaceflight samples. Out of the 14 genes analyzed for DNA
damage repair, four genes were modestly upregulated (_Atr_ , _Xrcc5_ , _Ercc1_
, _Apex1_ ; 1.1–1.3-fold) (Table 2, _p_ < 0.05). There were no significant
changes in apoptosis-related genes including _Trp53_ , _Bax_ , _Bcl2_ ,
_Casp2_ or _Casp9_ (Supplementary Table S2).

#### Table 2.

Spaceflight altered the expression of genes involved in the _Trp53_ signaling
pathway. Expression levels are represented as fold regulation in spaceflight
versus ground controls (FLT versus GRD). Shown are 23 differentially regulated
genes out of a panel of 84 genes related to the _Trp53_ signaling pathways as
assessed by RT-PCR. Out of these, 13 genes were upregulated and 10 genes were
downregulated. The change in expression levels of these genes were found to be
statistically significant by Mann–Whitney U test at _p_ < 0.05, n = 4.

Gene Symbol | Gene Name | Fold Regulation  
---|---|---  
_Cdkn1a_ | Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A (P21) | 6.80  
_Myc_ | Myelocytomatosis oncogene | 3.91  
_Hif1a_ | Hypoxia inducible factor 1, alpha subunit | 1.58  
_Pmaip1_ | Phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate-induced protein 1 | 1.54  
_Prkca_ | Protein kinase C, alpha | 1.49  
_Trp53bp2_ | Transformation related protein 53 binding protein 2 | 1.41  
_Apex1_ | Apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1 | 1.28  
_Ercc1_ | Excision repair cross-complementing rodent repair deficiency,   
complementation group 1 | 1.27  
_Foxo3_ | Forkhead box O3 | 1.27  
_Mlh1_ | MutL homolog 1 (E. coli) | 1.19  
_Pten_ | Phosphatase and tensin homolog | 1.18  
_Xrcc5_ | X-ray repair complementing defective repair in Chinese hamster cells 5 | 1.13  
_Atr_ | Ataxia telangiectasia and rad3 related | 1.10  
_Cdk4_ | Cyclin-dependent kinase 4 | −1.16  
_Apaf1_ | Apoptotic peptidase activating factor 1 | −1.41  
_Tnfrsf10b_ | Tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily, member 10b | −1.92  
_Chek2_ | CHK2 checkpoint homolog (_S. pombe_) | −2.15  
_Traf1_ | Tnf receptor-associated factor 1 | −2.25  
_Jun_ | Jun oncogene | −2.31  
_Pttg1_ | Pituitary tumor-transforming gene 1 | −2.42  
_Btg2_ | B-cell translocation gene 2, anti-proliferative | −3.50  
_Cdk1_ | Cyclin-dependent kinase 1 | −4.11  
_Tnf_ | Tumor necrosis factor | −9.86  
  
[Open in a new tab](table/ijms-22-09088-t002/)

### 2.4. Gene Networks and Disease Predictions

We made use of a computational approach to gain insight into possible
protein–protein interactions among the differentially expressed genes.
Analysis using String Db revealed potential interactions between the oxidative
stress response and _Trp53_ pathways (Figure 3). A number of oxidative stress
response DEGs formed a molecular interaction network including _Nox1_ and
_Sod1_ with Catalase serving as a central node. DEGs from the _Trp53_
signaling pathway also formed molecular interaction networks involving cell
cycle-related genes and transcription factors. For the _Trp53_ pathway, _Cdk1,
Cdk4, Cdkn1a_ and _Atr_ served as central nodes in a molecular network that
included _Chek2_ , _Fancc_ , _Ercc1_ , _Xrcc5_ and _Xpa1_ among others.
Interestingly, the oxidative stress response and _Trp53_ pathways were linked
by central nodes _FoxO3_ , _Jun_ , _Myc_ , and _Hif1a_ , all of which code for
major transcriptional regulators. This finding suggests global transcriptomic
changes in the heart response to spaceflight.

#### Figure 3.

[![Figure
3](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/5f11/8396460/4969035e3ac7/ijms-22-09088-g003.jpg)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=8396460_ijms-22-09088-g003.jpg)

[Open in a new tab](figure/ijms-22-09088-f003/)

Predicted molecular interactions among DEGs from an oxidative stress PCR Array
and _p53_ Signaling Pathway PCR Array using String Db (Refer to the Methods
section for details on analysis). Thicker lines connecting genes represent
greater confidence in molecular interactions.

We also utilized a computational approach to gain insight into possible
disease phenotypes associated with spaceflight-induced changes in gene
expression. Functional enrichment analysis of oxidative stress array DEGs
using Toppfun revealed enrichment of genes linked to hypertensive disease,
atherosclerosis, cerebrovascular accident and decompensation (Supplementary
Table S3). Using a similar analysis approach, _p53_ array DEGs revealed
potential links to a number of cancers including sarcoma, immune suppression,
impaired glucose tolerance and cardiovascular pathologies including
hypertensive disease, acute myocardial infarction, and atherosclerosis
(Supplementary Table S4).

## 3\. Discussion

Our findings provide new insight into how the heart responds at the molecular
level to the novel environment of space. Spaceflight experiments using rodents
present unique practical challenges though similar benefits to rodent studies
on Earth. The animals flown in space during this particular mission were
deemed healthy, as assessed by veterinary examination after return to Earth,
and the finding that animal body weights were comparable in FLT mice compared
to GRD controls at the termination of the study. Further, numerous scientific
reports from these mice describe related results obtained studying other organ
systems (e.g., [30,32,33]). The RNA samples recovered from the hearts were
consistent and of high quality. Therefore, we conclude that the results we
obtained from this mission were valid.

Whereas cardiovascular physiology has been studied intensively in astronauts,
analysis of cardiac changes at the tissue level has been more limited
[12,13,34,35,36]. Goldstein et al. [12] report that spaceflight (14 days)
reduces the cross-sectional area of papillary cardiomyocytes in rats relative
to ground controls, with ultrastructural changes consistent with cardiac
atrophy. Short duration (6 days) spaceflight upregulates activity and mRNA
expression of the mitochondrial enzyme, malate dehydrogenase in rat hearts,
and displays a pattern of mitochondrial gene expression changes discrete from
those in skeletal muscle [34]. More recently, long duration spaceflight (37
days) was shown to alter expression of methylation-related genes in the heart
of adult mice, but not cytoskeletal protein levels. Interestingly, lifetime
exposure of _Drosophila_ to microgravity leads to diminished cardiac size,
cardiac dysfunction, altered remodeling, and proteosomal abnormalities [36].
Furthermore, spaceflight causes cardiac progenitor cells in culture to display
a gene expression profile consistent with early, stem-like function along with
increased oxidative stress and re-entry into the cell cycle [37]. Thus, our
study on expression levels of oxidative stress and cell cycle-related genes
provides novel findings on how the heart responds to spaceflight at the tissue
level.

### 3.1. Oxidative Stress-Related Gene Expression in Spaceflight Heart

RT-PCR array data show that expression levels of 14 genes were significantly
(_p_ < 0.05) altered (11 upregulated and 3 downregulated) in FLT samples as
compared to GRD controls. In addition, RT-PCR analysis for _Nfe2l2_ revealed
lower levels in FLT mice than GRD. _Nfe2l2_ is a master transcriptional
regulator for oxidative stress response genes, and is rapidly transcribed
within seconds following changes in the gravity vector [23]. Other tissues
also display reduced _Nfe2l2_ expression levels in similar spaceflight
experiments entailing tissue recovery after landing [38]. Suzuki et al.
recently demonstrated that long duration spaceflight activates _Nfe2l2_
-dependent oxidative stress pathways in several tissues of growing mice [39].
Furthermore, _Nfe2l2_ -deficient mice are protected from spaceflight-induced
oxidative stress-related genes and changes in body weight [39], and also
display accelerated transition of muscle fiber type without protecting from
atrophy [40].

We also found that spaceflight upregulated _Nox1_ 6.6-fold, the change of
greatest magnitude in oxidative stress-related genes observed in our study.
NOX1 belongs to the NADPH oxidase family of enzymes and functions in
generating ROS in a highly regulated fashion [41,42]. NOX1 utilizes NADPH as
an electron donor and catalyzes transfer of electrons to molecular oxygen to
generate superoxide radicals. Superoxide radicals are short lived and are
readily converted into hydrogen peroxide. Thus, increased expression of _Nox1_
can cause an increase in the formation of hydrogen peroxide and other reactive
oxygen species (ROS) [41,42]. NADPH oxidases are major sources of ROS in the
vascular system and are involved in the pathophysiology of many cardiovascular
diseases such as hypertension and myocardial infarction [43]. Several recent
studies using ground-based models to simulate weightlessness show that
hindlimb unloading causes cardiac atrophy, reduces cardiomyocyte size and
cardiac dysfunction, as assessed by fractional shortening [14]. Inhibition of
NOX1 by apocynin (a NADPH oxidase inhibitor) reduces oxidative stress markers
in the heart, and mitigates atrophy and dysfunction in hindlimb unloaded mice,
suggesting that _Nox1_ plays an important role in mediating cardiac responses
to simulated weightlessness [44]. Thus, our results support the hypothesis
that increased expression of _Nox1_ during spaceflight contributes to
oxidative stress and myocardial abnormalities.

Oxidative stress PCR array results showed lower expression of _Ptgs2_ by
3.4-fold in FLT samples compared to GRD. PTGS2, also known as Cycloxygenase 2
(COX2), is the key, inducible enzyme in prostaglandin biosynthesis, and acts
as both a dioxygenase and as a peroxidase, converting hydrogen peroxide into
water. Thus, lower _Ptgs2_ expression can lead to inefficient removal of
hydrogen peroxide, accumulation of ROS and oxidative damage. PTGS2 is
important for the maintenance of healthy cardiac tissue. Conditional
cardiomyocyte-specific deletion of the _Ptgs2_ gene in adult mice reduces
cardiac output, decreases exercise tolerance and increases susceptibility to
induced ventricular arrhythmias [45]. Furthermore, human and animal models of
myocardial diseases show that _Ptgs2_ expression is associated with cardiac
tissue damaged by infarction, septicemia and inflammatory heart diseases [46].
In addition to inflammation, the prostaglandin pathway plays an important role
in mechanical signaling. In cultured cells activated by serum, spaceflight
prevents induction of _Ptgs2_ expression, which is avoided by on-orbit
centrifugation to replace the gravity vector, implicating sensitivity to a
biomechanical mechanism for microgravity-induced activation of the
prostaglandin pathway [47]. Inhibition of PTGS2 also impairs recovery of
skeletal muscle and bone from hindlimb unloading [48,49]. Thus, regulation of
the prostaglandin pathway by spaceflight via changes in _Ptgs2_ expression may
contribute to both oxidative stress and subsequent recovery on Earth.

_Txnip_ was upregulated 1.9-fold and _Fancc_ was downregulated 1.6-fold in FLT
compared to GRD, which also may contribute to a pro-oxidative milieu in the
heart during spaceflight. TXNIP is a negative regulator of thioredoxins (TRXs)
[50], which are potent antioxidants, and their downregulation by elevated
_Txnip_ expression in FLT samples may lead to increased oxidative stress in
cardiac tissue. In cultured human endothelial cells (HUVEC), _Txnip_ was the
most upregulated by spaceflight (33-fold) [51]. _Fancc_ codes for an
antioxidant and its downregulation can cause sensitivity to oxidative stress-
mediated damage to tissue [52].

Our results indicated moderate changes in several antioxidant genes (_Sod1_ ,
_Cat_ , _Prdx6_ , _Gsr_ , _Tpo_ , _Txnrd3_ , _Slc41a3_) and other oxidative
stress-responsive genes (_Xpa_ , _Prnp_) (1.2–2.4-fold, _p_ < 0.05) (Table 1).
The observed elevated expression levels of these antioxidant genes may be due
to activation of compensatory mechanisms.

Although the magnitude of differences between FLT and GRD for statistically
significant genes were generally modest, together, the findings suggest that
spaceflight activates a network of genes responsible for redox signaling and
defense against oxidative stress in the heart.

### 3.2. Cell Cycle and Senescence-Related Gene Expression in Spaceflight
Heart

Increased generation of ROS during spaceflight can lead to protein, lipid and
DNA damage in tissue and, as is the case with skeletal muscle, may contribute
to dysfunction caused by gravitational unloading. ROS are also involved in
vital cell signaling pathways such as cell-cycle progression, differentiation,
inflammation and apoptosis. Cell cycle progression in eukaryotes is regulated
at various checkpoints by the action of specific cyclin dependent kinases
(CDKs). The activities of these CDKs are controlled by the positive regulation
from cyclins and negative regulation from cyclin dependent kinase inhibitors
(CDKIs). Hence, expression levels of genes involved in cell cycle regulation,
inflammation, DNA damage repair and apoptosis were further analyzed in hearts
by _p53_ Signaling PCR array. The _p53_ Signaling PCR array includes 24 genes
involved in cell cycle regulation. Results indicate that nine of these genes
were significantly altered in FLT samples.

We found spaceflight increased _Cdkn1a_ /p21 expression 6.8-fold in hearts
compared to GRD, consistent with reports for other tissues including liver,
kidney, bone and muscle [27,30,31]. _CDKN1A_ (also known as P21), is a potent
CDK inhibitor and inhibits cell cycle progression at the G1 phase by
inhibiting the activity of CDK2 or CDK4. Increases in _p21_ levels in bone
from mice in this spaceflight experiment spaceflight were previously
associated with proliferative arrest in cultured osteoprogenitors [30].
However, the adult mammalian heart itself has limited regenerative ability.
Adult _p21_ levels in adult heart are thought to contribute to normal cell
cycle arrest in differentiated cardiomyocytes, and there is evidence that
cardiomyocytes can divide in the adult human heart [53], though it is unlikely
that such a small sub-population (1.3% of total) [53] can account for our
findings. More likely, the elevation in _p21_ caused by spaceflight may
contribute to cardiomyopathies [54] via other cellular processes such as DNA
repair, autophagy [38,55,56] and senescence. Interestingly, _Myc_ , a
mitogenic transcription factor gene that promotes cardiac hypertrophy in
response to Angiotensin II, was also highly upregulated in the spaceflight
heart samples we studied, and its deleterious action can be rescued by _p21_
re-expression in _p21_ -null mice [57]. Finally, in newborn mammals, _p21_
elevation might interfere with cardiomyocyte binucleation, an important heart
growth mechanism during post-natal development [58].

PTTG1 (Pituitary tumor-transforming gene 1) regulates the cell cycle by
inducing cyclin D3 and repressing _p21_ expression [59]. Thus, a decrease in
_Pttg1_ expression (2.4-fold) observed in FLT samples may contribute to the
observed increase in expression of _p21_ in FLT samples. In addition to
upregulation of cell cycle inhibitors, CDK’s and cyclins such as _Cdk1_ and
_Cdk4_ were downregulated in FLT samples, implicating an overall cell cycle
arrest in spaceflight samples.

Our results also indicate some apparently contradictory findings, such as the
expression levels of genes for cell cycle arrest proteins, _Chek2_ and _Btg2_
, were decreased 2.2- and 3.5-fold, respectively in FLT samples, contrary to
what is expected for _Chek2_ when _Myc_ is overexpressed based on what is
observed in lymphoma cells [60].

Thus, one of the crucial findings of our study is that spaceflight alters the
expression levels of major cell cycle and cell growth regulators. As the
samples analyzed consist predominantly (but not solely) of fully
differentiated non-dividing cardiomyocytes, this suggests that spaceflight
activates _p21_ \- and _Myc_ -related pathways to regulate cell growth,
cardiomyocyte function, and potentially cardiomyopathy, although complex
interactions such as these remain to be elucidated.

### 3.3. Apoptosis and DNA Damage Repair-Related Gene Expression in
Spaceflight Hearts

There were no significant changes in apoptosis-related genes such as _p53_ ,
_Bax_ , _Bcl2_ , _Casp2_ or _Casp9_ (Supplementary Table S2). DNA damage
repair genes such as _Atr_ , _Xrcc5_ , _Ercc1_ and _Apex1_ were only
moderately altered in spaceflight (1.1- to 1.3-fold), suggesting widespread
DNA damage responses were not occurring at the time of sample recovery.
However, we cannot rule out the possibility that spaceflight activates DNA
damage and apoptosis pathways in a smaller sub-population of cell types within
the heart during spaceflight, as shown previously for exposure to low dose,
heavy ion radiation (16O, 600 MeV/n) simulating space radiation [61]. Evidence
supporting the possibility that spaceflight activates DNA damage pathways
and/or apoptosis has been reported for tissues other than heart [62],
including the thymus [63,64] and the eye [62,64], and multi-omics analyses
reveal increased levels of DNA damage markers in urine and blood from
astronauts [26].

### 3.4. Inflammatory Pathway Gene Expression in Spaceflight Heart

Inflammatory response genes, such as _Tnf_ (tumor necrosis factor),
_Tnfrsf10b_ (_Tnf_ receptor superfamily, member 10) and _Traf1_ (Tnf receptor-
associated factor) were significantly downregulated (9.9-, 1.9- and 2.3-fold
decrease) in FLT samples compared to GRD controls. _Tnf_ is a multifunctional
pro-inflammatory cytokine, which regulates a wide variety of biological
processes such as inflammation, proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis and
cytotoxicity [65]. Space is a hazardous environment and proper immune
functioning is crucial for astronaut health and success of space missions. The
decreased expression of _Tnf_ , _Tnfrsf10b_ and _Traf1_ observed in our study
suggests downregulation of this pro-inflammatory signaling pathway, which may
lead to compromised immune function. Our results are consistent with other
studies showing spaceflight reduces _Tnf_ expression levels in both mice
[19,66] and humans [67]. In addition, human T cell cultures on the
International Space Station (ISS) show a 15-fold decrement in expression of
_Tnf_ in T cells and its downstream effectors in microgravity as compared to
cells centrifuged at 1g [68]. During a very long duration spaceflight, _TNF_ α
expression in the blood of astronauts is elevated [24] but after return to
Earth (between days 0 and 5) as skeletal muscle enters a recovery phase,
_Tnfα_ expression rapidly declines along with other cytokines in the _Il6_
pathway [69]. Together, these findings implicate a biomechanical, gravity-
dependent mechanism for regulating Tnf-related pathways.

Although the radiation exposure of mice on the STS-131 mission is considered
too low to account for our results, relatively low doses of particle radiation
(<30 cGy) can lead to altered regulation of disease-related pathways and
deficits in cardiac function [70,71]. Furthermore, expression of oxidative
stress and inflammation markers in the heart caused by low dose gamma
radiation exposure is exacerbated when combined with hindlimb unloading [17].
Further study is needed to determine the influence of space radiation in
combination with microgravity, on the heart in the spaceflight environment
during long duration missions.

### 3.5. Gene Networks and Molecular Signatures of Disease

Computational analysis revealed that changes in a subset of genes that were
differentially expressed due to spaceflight were linked to disease, including
immune suppression and impairments in glucose homeostasis, consistent with
findings in astronauts [72,73]. In addition, a subset of the DEGs resulting
from spaceflight were associated with cardiovascular pathologies such as
atherosclerosis, cardiovascular decompensation, hypertensive disease and
myocardial infarction. Cardiovascular decompensation and volumetric changes in
blood flow were consistent with previous observations in crew members during
flight [3,8,74]. In a previous study on a subset of ISS crewmembers, mean
arterial pressures reportedly do not change significantly during spaceflight.
However, cardiac output and stroke volume are increased in flight compared to
the seated position on Earth (although comparable to the supine position on
Earth) [3]. Thus, our findings were consistent with previous reports on
astronauts indicating that spaceflight adversely affects cardiovascular
health.

Computational analyses also indicated that spaceflight led to altered
regulation of molecular networks within the oxidative damage response and cell
proliferation pathways. Our findings suggest that oxidative stress and _Trp35_
signaling pathways were linked and that spaceflight alters gene interactions
between these two pathways. Furthermore, transcription factors _FoxO3_ , _Jun_
, _Myc_ , and _Hif1a_ were predicted to mediate the interaction between these
two pathways, making these genes promising targets for mitigating gene network
changes in response to spaceflight. _Cat_ , _Cdkn1a_ , _Cdk1_ and _Cdk4_ also
were predicted to serve as central hubs of gene networks that are altered by
spaceflight. Hence, these molecules may be potential targets for the
development of countermeasures against spaceflight-induced tissue deficits.

### 3.6. Limitations

For extrapolation of findings from this murine study to humans, there is the
inherent limitation of the difference in species as well as a potential
influence of the specific strain and sex which were selected as subjects.
Factors related to experimental protocol also important to consider when
interpreting gene expression findings from this experiment include the fixed
duration of the mission (15 days), sample recovery only after animals were
returned to Earth (3+ hours after landing), and the fact that ground control
animals were housed in flight-matched habitats but were not exposed to similar
forces as the flight mice encountered during launch and landing. Therefore,
observed changes in gene expression did not solely reflect changes observed
during habitation in microgravity, but for rapidly responding genes, such as
_Nfe2l2_ , also may reflect re-entry and re-adaptation to 1-gravity on Earth,
however briefly.

As the scope of our investigation focused on RT-PCR, additional studies are
needed to elucidate how spaceflight-induced oxidative stress may mediate cell
cycle/growth and function, to gain deeper insight into how the cardiovascular
system responds to the space environment and recovers after return to Earth.
Furthermore, because the heart consists of multiple cell types, including
cardiomyocytes, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and macrophages, each with a
discrete gene expression profile [53], future experiments could focus on
spatial transcriptomics to determine the cellular source of specific gene
expression changes, as well as the regulation of protein expression together
with cardiac function.

## 4\. Materials and Methods

### 4.1. Ethics Statement

All animal procedures were conducted in accordance with guidelines described
by the National Institute of Health Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals, and approved by all relevant committees, including the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) Ames Research Center. The IACUC approval number
associated with this animal study was NAS-10-002-Y1.

### 4.2. Animals and Spaceflight

The mice in this study were flown on the Space Shuttle Discovery during the
STS-131 mission for the experiment “Mouse Antigen-Specific CD4+ T Cell Priming
and Memory Response during Spaceflight”. The heart tissue used in this
experiment was an award to E. Almeida as part of the NASA STS-131 Mouse
Immunology I Biospecimen Sharing Program (BSP). Female C57BL/6J mice were
acclimatized to spaceflight food bars and lixits, but were not placed in
Animal Enclosure Module (AEM) habitats until just before spaceflight. Mice
were divided into two groups: flight (FLT) and ground (GRD) control. The NASA
AEM units are composed of a stainless-steel grid cage, fan blowers, a layered
filter system, interior lamps, specialized food bars, and a water box. The AEM
units are self-contained habitats that provide group housing with constant ad
libitum access to food and water while also providing a waste management
system that isolates the animals from their waste. FLT mice were launched at
14 weeks of age then flown in space for 15 days and were not subjected to any
experimental procedures during spaceflight.

Synchronous GRD control mice were also housed in AEMs, maintained in an
orbital environmental simulator at Kennedy Space Center, and exposed to
environmental conditions matched closely to those of FLT mice on the shuttle
(temperature, light/dark cycle, humidity, and carbon dioxide levels). FLT and
GRD control animals were weighed before flight and immediately after return
and were subjected to veterinary examination prior to euthanasia. Food and
water consumption of each group were measured upon recovery. Animals were
euthanized at 16 weeks of age starting approximately 3 h after landing using
isoflurane anesthesia followed by thoracotomy. Euthanasia and dissections
proceeded at a pace of one mouse every 15–20 min. The heart was removed and
major veins and feed arteries trimmed off. The hearts of four mice per group
were bisected into the cephalic and caudal regions, and the caudal halves
(ventricles) were frozen in liquid nitrogen for later analysis of gene
expression (the remaining hearts from four mice per group were distributed to
another BSP investigator). The frozen samples were transported on dry ice to
NASA Ames Research Center and stored in liquid nitrogen until analysis.

### 4.3. RNA Isolation and cDNA Synthesis

Total RNA was isolated from frozen heart tissue by homogenization and RNA
extraction using TRIzol reagent (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Tissue
samples were homogenized in 1 mL of TRIzol reagent and incubated at room
temperature for 5 min. After incubation, 0.2 mL of chloroform was added, the
sample agitated vigorously for 30 s and then incubated for 2 min at room
temperature. The mixture was then centrifuged at 12,000× _g_ for 15 min at 4
°C. Following centrifugation, the upper aqueous phases were separated and
incubated with 0.5 mL of isopropanol for 10 min at room temperature. Samples
were then centrifuged at 12,000× _g_ for 15 min at 4 °C and the RNA pellet was
washed with 70% ethanol. The RNA pellet was dissolved in 100 μL of nuclease-
free water and further purified using an RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia,
CA, USA), per instructions. The quantities and qualities of purified RNA were
determined by measuring absorbance at 260 nm and 280 nm using a NanoDrop 2000
Spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA). RNA integrity was
assessed by running RNA on 0.8% agarose formaldehyde-denaturing gel with
ethidium bromide and further visualized by Fluor-S Multimager (Bio-Rad,
Hercules, CA, USA).

All RNA samples were analyzed by thematic real time PCR arrays (for Oxidative
Stress and _p53_ -related pathways) or RT-PCR (for _Nfe2l2_). Although whole
transcriptome analysis would be valuable, samples are no longer available for
additional analyses.

### 4.4. Quantitative Real-Time PCR Array

An equal amount of RNA (1 μg) was used from FLT and GRD samples to synthesize
cDNA using RT2 PCR Array First Strand Kit (SABiosciences, Frederick, MD, USA).
Real-time PCR was performed using the Oxidative Stress PCR Array (PAMM-065)
and _p53_ Signaling Pathway PCR Array (PAMM-027) according to the
manufacturer’s protocol (SABiosciences, Frederick, MD, USA). Briefly, FLT and
GRD cDNA samples were mixed with RT2 SYBR Green qPCR Master Mix
(SABiosciences, Frederick, MD, USA) and distributed across the 96-well plate
array. Each of the 96-well plate arrays contained primers for 84 genes related
to oxidative stress or _p53_ signaling pathways and control housekeeping genes
(HKG). PCR was performed in a thermal cycler (ABI 7500 Standard, Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) with initial denaturation at 95 °C for 10
min, followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s and 60 °C for one minute. FLT and
GRD cDNA samples were also run on control RT2 RNA QC PCR Array plates
(PAMM-999) to test RNA quality, reverse transcription efficiency, PCR
efficiency and genomic DNA contamination.

### 4.5. Nfe2l2 Real-Time PCR

cDNA was synthesized by using QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit (Qiagen,
Valencia, CA, USA). Briefly, 1 μg of RNA sample was treated with gDNA Wipeout
Buffer at 42 °C for 2 min then reverse-transcription was performed using
Quantiscript RT Buffer and Quantiscript Reverse Transcriptase as per
manufacturer’s instruction. The Real-Time PCR mixture was made using
QuantiTect SYBR Green PCR Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). Synthesized cDNA
from the previous step was mixed with Quantiscript SYBR Green PCR Mix and
_Nfe2l2_ primer mixture, per manufacturer’s protocol. Real-time PCR was
performed in a thermal cycler (ABI 7500 Standard, Applied Biosystems, Foster
City, CA) with initial activation at 95 °C for 10 min followed by 40 cycles of
95 °C for 15 s and 60 °C for 1 min. Ct values were retrieved by maintaining
the same threshold among all the samples.

### 4.6. Data Analysis and Statistics

For the Oxidative Stress PCR Array (PAMM-065) and _p53_ Signaling Pathway PCR
Array, relative expression levels of genes were calculated using the
comparative threshold cycle method (ΔΔCt) with normalization to the average
expression levels of five housekeeping genes (SABiosciences Data Analysis
Software). FLT samples were compared to GRD controls using Mann–Whitney U Test
using _p_ < 0.05 as the threshold of significance and sample size of n = 4
mice per group.

For _Nfe2l2_ RT-PCR of heart samples, the change in expression levels were
calculated using the ΔΔCt method with Hypoxanthine Phosphoribosyltransferase
(_Hprt_) 1 as housekeeping gene. The log2 (linear) normalized expression from
flight and ground control groups was used in the Mann–Whitney U test at _p_ <
0.05, n = 4 mice per group.

### 4.7. Gene Network Predictions and Functional Analysis

To generate predictions on potential protein interactions, statistically
significant differentially expressed genes from both PCR arrays were entered
into the String DB protein-protein interaction database [75]. Experimental
evidence, databases, and co-expression were used as sources to generate
protein interaction networks. The interaction score was set to a threshold of
“medium” (0.400).

Toppfun [76] was used to gain insight into whether the differentially
expressed genes were linked to human disease phenotypes. Statistically
significant differentially expressed genes were entered into the Toppfun
database. The results were filtered using a Benjamini–Hochberg false discovery
rate (FDR) threshold of _p_ < 0.05 and a query to genome overlap of four or
more genes.

## 5\. Conclusions

In conclusion, our study revealed that spaceflight significantly altered
cardiac expression of genes related to cell cycle/growth (notably _Cdkn1a_
/_p21, Cdk1,_ and _Myc_), inflammation (notably _Tnf_) and oxidative stress
(notably _Nfe2l2_ , _Nox1, Ptgs2_), which may contribute to cardiac
dysfunction. These findings provide novel data suitable for developing
testable hypotheses for further study. Identification of specific mechanisms
and molecules responsible for excess ROS generation during spaceflight is of
considerable interest, and may yield new therapeutic approaches.

## Acknowledgments

The authors thank Michael Delp for tissue dissection, and Natalya Dvorochkin
for technical assistance at the time of sample recovery. We are grateful to
Hami Ray for editorial assistance and Bhupendra Soni (Celerim Solutions) for
graphics shown in Figure 1.

## Supplementary Materials

The following are available online at
<https://www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/ijms22169088/s1>.

[Click here for additional data
file.](/articles/instance/8396460/bin/ijms-22-09088-s001.zip) (96.2KB, zip)

## Author Contributions

Conceptualization, R.K.G., E.A.C.A. and A.K.; data analysis, A.K. and
C.G.T.T.; interpretation of results, R.K.G., E.A.C.A., A.K. and C.G.T.T.;
writing—original draft preparation, A.K. and R.K.G.; writing—review and
editing, R.K.G., E.A.C.A. and C.G.T.T.; supervision, R.K.G.; funding
acquisition, R.K.G. and E.A.C.A. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.

## Funding

This work was supported by a NASA Human Research Program grant
(NNH04ZUU005N/RAD2004-0000-0110) to R.K.G. and a NASA Space Biology grant
(NNH08ZTT003N) to E.A.C.A. A.K. was a recipient of a NASA Space Biology
Postdoctoral Fellowship award.

## Institutional Review Board Statement

All animal procedures were conducted in accordance with guidelines described
by the National Institute of Health Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals, and approved by all relevant committees, including the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA), Ames Research Center. Approval number: NAS-10-002-Y1.

## Informed Consent Statement

Not applicable.

## Data Availability Statement

All data associated with this study are provided in the main figures and
tables and in the supplementary information.

## Conflicts of Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Footnotes

**Publisher’s Note:** MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## References

  * 1.Hughson R.L., Shoemaker J.K., Blaber A.P., Arbeille P., Greaves D.K., Pereira-Junior P.P., Xu D. Cardiovascular regulation during long-duration spaceflights to the International Space Station. J. Appl. Physiol. 2012;112:719–727. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01196.2011. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.01196.2011)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22134699/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Appl.%20Physiol.&title=Cardiovascular%20regulation%20during%20long-duration%20spaceflights%20to%20the%20International%20Space%20Station&author=R.L.%20Hughson&author=J.K.%20Shoemaker&author=A.P.%20Blaber&author=P.%20Arbeille&author=D.K.%20Greaves&volume=112&publication_year=2012&pages=719-727&pmid=22134699&doi=10.1152/japplphysiol.01196.2011&)]
  * 2.Demontis G.C., Germani M.M., Caiani E.G., Barravecchia I., Passino C., Angeloni D. Human Pathophysiological Adaptations to the Space Environment. Front. Physiol. 2017;8:547. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00547. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2017.00547)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC5539130/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28824446/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front.%20Physiol.&title=Human%20Pathophysiological%20Adaptations%20to%20the%20Space%20Environment&author=G.C.%20Demontis&author=M.M.%20Germani&author=E.G.%20Caiani&author=I.%20Barravecchia&author=C.%20Passino&volume=8&publication_year=2017&pages=547&pmid=28824446&doi=10.3389/fphys.2017.00547&)]
  * 3.Marshall-Goebel K., Laurie S.S., Alferova I.V., Arbeille P., Aunon-Chancellor S.M., Ebert D.J., Lee S.M.C., Macias B.R., Martin D.S., Pattarini J.M., et al. Assessment of jugular venous blood flow stasis and thrombosis during spaceflight. JAMA Netw. Open. 2019;2:e1915011. doi: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.15011. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.15011)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC6902784/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31722025/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JAMA%20Netw.%20Open&title=Assessment%20of%20jugular%20venous%20blood%20flow%20stasis%20and%20thrombosis%20during%20spaceflight&author=K.%20Marshall-Goebel&author=S.S.%20Laurie&author=I.V.%20Alferova&author=P.%20Arbeille&author=S.M.%20Aunon-Chancellor&volume=2&publication_year=2019&pages=e1915011&pmid=31722025&doi=10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.15011&)]
  * 4.Buckey J.C., Jr., Gaffney F.A., Lane L.D., Levine B.D., Watenpaugh D.E., Wright S.J., Yancy C.W., Jr., Meyer D.M., Blomqvist C.G. Central venous pressure in space. J. Appl. Physiol. 1996;81:19–25. doi: 10.1152/jappl.1996.81.1.19. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/jappl.1996.81.1.19)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8828643/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Appl.%20Physiol.&title=Central%20venous%20pressure%20in%20space&author=J.C.%20Buckey&author=F.A.%20Gaffney&author=L.D.%20Lane&author=B.D.%20Levine&author=D.E.%20Watenpaugh&volume=81&publication_year=1996&pages=19-25&pmid=8828643&doi=10.1152/jappl.1996.81.1.19&)]
  * 5.Moore T.P., Thornton W.E. Space shuttle inflight and postflight fluid shifts measured by leg volume changes. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 1987;58:A91–A96. [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3675513/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Aviat.%20Space%20Environ.%20Med.&title=Space%20shuttle%20inflight%20and%20postflight%20fluid%20shifts%20measured%20by%20leg%20volume%20changes&author=T.P.%20Moore&author=W.E.%20Thornton&volume=58&publication_year=1987&pages=A91-A96&pmid=3675513&)]
  * 6.Vernice N.A., Meydan C., Afshinnekoo E., Mason C.E. Long-term spaceflight and the cardiovascular system. Precis. Clin. Med. 2020;3:284–291. doi: 10.1093/pcmedi/pbaa022. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/pcmedi/pbaa022)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC7757439/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33391848/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Precis.%20Clin.%20Med.&title=Long-term%20spaceflight%20and%20the%20cardiovascular%20system&author=N.A.%20Vernice&author=C.%20Meydan&author=E.%20Afshinnekoo&author=C.E.%20Mason&volume=3&publication_year=2020&pages=284-291&pmid=33391848&doi=10.1093/pcmedi/pbaa022&)]
  * 7.Wieling W., Halliwill J.R., Karemaker J.M. Orthostatic intolerance after space flight. J. Physiol. 2002;538:1. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2001.013372. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2001.013372)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC2290012/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11773310/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Physiol.&title=Orthostatic%20intolerance%20after%20space%20flight&author=W.%20Wieling&author=J.R.%20Halliwill&author=J.M.%20Karemaker&volume=538&publication_year=2002&pages=1&pmid=11773310&doi=10.1113/jphysiol.2001.013372&)]
  * 8.Gallo C., Ridolfi L., Scarsoglio S. Cardiovascular deconditioning during long-term spaceflight through multiscale modeling. NPJ Microgravity. 2020;6:27. doi: 10.1038/s41526-020-00117-5. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-020-00117-5)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC7529778/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33083524/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=NPJ%20Microgravity&title=Cardiovascular%20deconditioning%20during%20long-term%20spaceflight%20through%20multiscale%20modeling&author=C.%20Gallo&author=L.%20Ridolfi&author=S.%20Scarsoglio&volume=6&publication_year=2020&pages=27&pmid=33083524&doi=10.1038/s41526-020-00117-5&)]
  * 9.MacNamara J.P., Dias K.A., Sarma S., Lee S.M.C., Martin D., Romeijn M., Zaha V.G., Levine B.D. Cardiac effects of repeated weightlessness during extreme duration swimming compared with spaceflight. Circulation. 2021;143:1533–1535. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.050418. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.050418)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33775108/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Cardiac%20effects%20of%20repeated%20weightlessness%20during%20extreme%20duration%20swimming%20compared%20with%20spaceflight&author=J.P.%20MacNamara&author=K.A.%20Dias&author=S.%20Sarma&author=S.M.C.%20Lee&author=D.%20Martin&volume=143&publication_year=2021&pages=1533-1535&pmid=33775108&doi=10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.050418&)]
  * 10.Perhonen M.A., Franco F., Lane L.D., Buckey J.C., Blomqvist C.G., Zerwekh J.E., Peshock R.M., Weatherall P.T., Levine B.D. Cardiac atrophy after bed rest and spaceflight. J. Appl. Physiol. 2001;91:645–653. doi: 10.1152/jappl.2001.91.2.645. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/jappl.2001.91.2.645)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11457776/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Appl.%20Physiol.&title=Cardiac%20atrophy%20after%20bed%20rest%20and%20spaceflight&author=M.A.%20Perhonen&author=F.%20Franco&author=L.D.%20Lane&author=J.C.%20Buckey&author=C.G.%20Blomqvist&volume=91&publication_year=2001&pages=645-653&pmid=11457776&doi=10.1152/jappl.2001.91.2.645&)]
  * 11.Summers R.L., Martin D.S., Meck J.V., Coleman T.G. Mechanism of spaceflight-induced changes in left ventricular mass. Am. J. Cardiol. 2005;95:1128–1130. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2005.01.033. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjcard.2005.01.033)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15842991/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Cardiol.&title=Mechanism%20of%20spaceflight-induced%20changes%20in%20left%20ventricular%20mass&author=R.L.%20Summers&author=D.S.%20Martin&author=J.V.%20Meck&author=T.G.%20Coleman&volume=95&publication_year=2005&pages=1128-1130&pmid=15842991&doi=10.1016/j.amjcard.2005.01.033&)]
  * 12.Goldstein M.A., Edwards R.J., Schroeter J.P. Cardiac morphology after conditions of microgravity during COSMOS 2044. J. Appl. Physiol. 1992;73:94S–100S. doi: 10.1152/jappl.1992.73.2.S94. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/jappl.1992.73.2.S94)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1526957/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Appl.%20Physiol.&title=Cardiac%20morphology%20after%20conditions%20of%20microgravity%20during%20COSMOS%202044&author=M.A.%20Goldstein&author=R.J.%20Edwards&author=J.P.%20Schroeter&volume=73&publication_year=1992&pages=94S-100S&pmid=1526957&doi=10.1152/jappl.1992.73.2.S94&)]
  * 13.Ray C.A., Vasques M., Miller T.A., Wilkerson M.K., Delp M.D. Effect of short-term microgravity and long-term hindlimb unloading on rat cardiac mass and function. J. Appl. Physiol. 2001;91:1207–1213. doi: 10.1152/jappl.2001.91.3.1207. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/jappl.2001.91.3.1207)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11509517/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Appl.%20Physiol.&title=Effect%20of%20short-term%20microgravity%20and%20long-term%20hindlimb%20unloading%20on%20rat%20cardiac%20mass%20and%20function&author=C.A.%20Ray&author=M.%20Vasques&author=T.A.%20Miller&author=M.K.%20Wilkerson&author=M.D.%20Delp&volume=91&publication_year=2001&pages=1207-1213&pmid=11509517&doi=10.1152/jappl.2001.91.3.1207&)]
  * 14.Liang L., Li H., Cao T., Qu L., Zhang L., Fan G.C., Greer P.A., Li J., Jones D.L., Peng T. Calpain activation mediates microgravity-induced myocardial abnormalities in mice via p38 and ERK1/2 MAPK pathways. J. Biol. Chem. 2020;295:16840–16851. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.011890. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA119.011890)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC7864076/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32989050/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biol.%20Chem.&title=Calpain%20activation%20mediates%20microgravity-induced%20myocardial%20abnormalities%20in%20mice%20via%20p38%20and%20ERK1/2%20MAPK%20pathways&author=L.%20Liang&author=H.%20Li&author=T.%20Cao&author=L.%20Qu&author=L.%20Zhang&volume=295&publication_year=2020&pages=16840-16851&pmid=32989050&doi=10.1074/jbc.RA119.011890&)]
  * 15.Wang X.P., Xing C.Y., Zhang J.X., Zhou J.H., Li Y.C., Yang H.Y., Zhang P.F., Zhang W., Huang Y., Long J.G., et al. Time-restricted feeding alleviates cardiac dysfunction induced by simulated microgravity via restoring cardiac FGF21 signaling. FASEB J. 2020;34:15180–15196. doi: 10.1096/fj.202001246RR. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.202001246RR)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32954538/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=FASEB%20J.&title=Time-restricted%20feeding%20alleviates%20cardiac%20dysfunction%20induced%20by%20simulated%20microgravity%20via%20restoring%20cardiac%20FGF21%20signaling&author=X.P.%20Wang&author=C.Y.%20Xing&author=J.X.%20Zhang&author=J.H.%20Zhou&author=Y.C.%20Li&volume=34&publication_year=2020&pages=15180-15196&pmid=32954538&doi=10.1096/fj.202001246RR&)]
  * 16.Coleman M.A., Sasi S.P., Onufrak J., Natarajan M., Manickam K., Schwab J., Muralidharan S., Peterson L.E., Alekseyev Y.O., Yan X., et al. Low-dose radiation affects cardiac physiology: Gene networks and molecular signaling in cardiomyocytes. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 2015;309:H1947–H1963. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00050.2015. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00050.2015)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4698384/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26408534/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Physiol.%20Heart%20Circ.%20Physiol.&title=Low-dose%20radiation%20affects%20cardiac%20physiology:%20Gene%20networks%20and%20molecular%20signaling%20in%20cardiomyocytes&author=M.A.%20Coleman&author=S.P.%20Sasi&author=J.%20Onufrak&author=M.%20Natarajan&author=K.%20Manickam&volume=309&publication_year=2015&pages=H1947-H1963&pmid=26408534&doi=10.1152/ajpheart.00050.2015&)]
  * 17.Seawright J.W., Samman Y., Sridharan V., Mao X.W., Cao M., Singh P., Melnyk S., Koturbash I., Nelson G.A., Hauer-Jensen M., et al. Effects of low-dose rate gamma-irradiation combined with simulated microgravity on markers of oxidative stress, DNA methylation potential, and remodeling in the mouse heart. PLoS ONE. 2017;12:e0180594. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0180594. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0180594)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC5498037/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28678877/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20ONE&title=Effects%20of%20low-dose%20rate%20gamma-irradiation%20combined%20with%20simulated%20microgravity%20on%20markers%20of%20oxidative%20stress,%20DNA%20methylation%20potential,%20and%20remodeling%20in%20the%20mouse%20heart&author=J.W.%20Seawright&author=Y.%20Samman&author=V.%20Sridharan&author=X.W.%20Mao&author=M.%20Cao&volume=12&publication_year=2017&pages=e0180594&pmid=28678877&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0180594&)]
  * 18.Beheshti A., McDonald J.T., Miller J., Grabham P., Costes S.V. GeneLab database analyses suggest long-term impact of space radiation on the cardiovascular system by the activation of FYN through reactive oxygen species. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019;20:661. doi: 10.3390/ijms20030661. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20030661)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC6387434/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30717456/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Mol.%20Sci.&title=GeneLab%20database%20analyses%20suggest%20long-term%20impact%20of%20space%20radiation%20on%20the%20cardiovascular%20system%20by%20the%20activation%20of%20FYN%20through%20reactive%20oxygen%20species&author=A.%20Beheshti&author=J.T.%20McDonald&author=J.%20Miller&author=P.%20Grabham&author=S.V.%20Costes&volume=20&publication_year=2019&pages=661&pmid=30717456&doi=10.3390/ijms20030661&)]
  * 19.Baqai F.P., Gridley D.S., Slater J.M., Luo-Owen X., Stodieck L.S., Ferguson V., Chapes S.K., Pecaut M.J. Effects of spaceflight on innate immune function and antioxidant gene expression. J. Appl. Physiol. 2009;106:1935–1942. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.91361.2008. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.91361.2008)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC2692779/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19342437/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Appl.%20Physiol.&title=Effects%20of%20spaceflight%20on%20innate%20immune%20function%20and%20antioxidant%20gene%20expression&author=F.P.%20Baqai&author=D.S.%20Gridley&author=J.M.%20Slater&author=X.%20Luo-Owen&author=L.S.%20Stodieck&volume=106&publication_year=2009&pages=1935-1942&pmid=19342437&doi=10.1152/japplphysiol.91361.2008&)]
  * 20.Afanas’ev I. ROS and RNS signaling in heart disorders: Could antioxidant treatment be successful? Oxid. Med. Cell Longev. 2011;2011:293769. doi: 10.1155/2011/293769. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/293769)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC3170796/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21912722/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Oxid.%20Med.%20Cell%20Longev.&title=ROS%20and%20RNS%20signaling%20in%20heart%20disorders:%20Could%20antioxidant%20treatment%20be%20successful?&author=I.%20Afanas%E2%80%99ev&volume=2011&publication_year=2011&pages=293769&pmid=21912722&doi=10.1155/2011/293769&)]
  * 21.Rizzo A.M., Corsetto P.A., Montorfano G., Milani S., Zava S., Tavella S., Cancedda R., Berra B. Effects of long-term space flight on erythrocytes and oxidative stress of rodents. PLoS ONE. 2012;7:e32361. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032361. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0032361)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC3296700/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22412864/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20ONE&title=Effects%20of%20long-term%20space%20flight%20on%20erythrocytes%20and%20oxidative%20stress%20of%20rodents&author=A.M.%20Rizzo&author=P.A.%20Corsetto&author=G.%20Montorfano&author=S.%20Milani&author=S.%20Zava&volume=7&publication_year=2012&pages=e32361&pmid=22412864&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0032361&)]
  * 22.Barrila J., Ott C.M., LeBlanc C., Mehta S.K., Crabbe A., Stafford P., Pierson D.L., Nickerson C.A. Spaceflight modulates gene expression in the whole blood of astronauts. NPJ Microgravity. 2016;2:16039. doi: 10.1038/npjmgrav.2016.39. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/npjmgrav.2016.39)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC5515525/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28725744/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=NPJ%20Microgravity&title=Spaceflight%20modulates%20gene%20expression%20in%20the%20whole%20blood%20of%20astronauts&author=J.%20Barrila&author=C.M.%20Ott&author=C.%20LeBlanc&author=S.K.%20Mehta&author=A.%20Crabbe&volume=2&publication_year=2016&pages=16039&pmid=28725744&doi=10.1038/npjmgrav.2016.39&)]
  * 23.Tauber S., Christoffel S., Thiel C.S., Ullrich O. Transcriptional homeostasis of oxidative stress-related pathways in altered gravity. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018;19:2814. doi: 10.3390/ijms19092814. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms19092814)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC6164947/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30231541/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Mol.%20Sci.&title=Transcriptional%20homeostasis%20of%20oxidative%20stress-related%20pathways%20in%20altered%20gravity&author=S.%20Tauber&author=S.%20Christoffel&author=C.S.%20Thiel&author=O.%20Ullrich&volume=19&publication_year=2018&pages=2814&pmid=30231541&doi=10.3390/ijms19092814&)]
  * 24.Garrett-Bakelman F.E., Darshi M., Green S.J., Gur R.C., Lin L., Macias B.R., McKenna M.J., Meydan C., Mishra T., Nasrini J., et al. The NASA Twins Study: A multidimensional analysis of a year-long human spaceflight. Science. 2019;364 doi: 10.1126/science.aau8650. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aau8650)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC7580864/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30975860/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=The%20NASA%20Twins%20Study:%20A%20multidimensional%20analysis%20of%20a%20year-long%20human%20spaceflight&author=F.E.%20Garrett-Bakelman&author=M.%20Darshi&author=S.J.%20Green&author=R.C.%20Gur&author=L.%20Lin&volume=364&publication_year=2019&pmid=30975860&doi=10.1126/science.aau8650&)]
  * 25.Overbey E.G., da Silveira W.A., Stanbouly S., Nishiyama N.C., Roque-Torres G.D., Pecaut M.J., Zawieja D.C., Wang C., Willey J.S., Delp M.D., et al. Spaceflight influences gene expression, photoreceptor integrity, and oxidative stress-related damage in the murine retina. Sci. Rep. 2019;9:13304. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-49453-x. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-49453-x)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC6746706/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31527661/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sci.%20Rep.&title=Spaceflight%20influences%20gene%20expression,%20photoreceptor%20integrity,%20and%20oxidative%20stress-related%20damage%20in%20the%20murine%20retina&author=E.G.%20Overbey&author=W.A.%20da%20Silveira&author=S.%20Stanbouly&author=N.C.%20Nishiyama&author=G.D.%20Roque-Torres&volume=9&publication_year=2019&pages=13304&pmid=31527661&doi=10.1038/s41598-019-49453-x&)]
  * 26.da Silveira W.A., Fazelinia H., Rosenthal S.B., Laiakis E.C., Kim M.S., Meydan C., Kidane Y., Rathi K.S., Smith S.M., Stear B., et al. Comprehensive multi-omics analysis reveals mitochondrial stress as a central biological hub for spaceflight impact. Cell. 2020;183:1185–1201.e1120. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.002. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.002)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC7870178/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33242417/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell&title=Comprehensive%20multi-omics%20analysis%20reveals%20mitochondrial%20stress%20as%20a%20central%20biological%20hub%20for%20spaceflight%20impact&author=W.A.%20da%20Silveira&author=H.%20Fazelinia&author=S.B.%20Rosenthal&author=E.C.%20Laiakis&author=M.S.%20Kim&volume=183&publication_year=2020&pages=1185-1201.e1120&pmid=33242417&doi=10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.002&)]
  * 27.Chakraborty N., Waning D.L., Gautam A., Hoke A., Sowe B., Youssef D., Butler S., Savaglio M., Childress P.J., Kumar R., et al. Gene-Metabolite network linked to inhibited bioenergetics in association with spaceflight-induced loss of male mouse quadriceps muscle. J. Bone Miner. Res. 2020;35:2049–2057. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4102. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.4102)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC7689867/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32511780/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Bone%20Miner.%20Res.&title=Gene-Metabolite%20network%20linked%20to%20inhibited%20bioenergetics%20in%20association%20with%20spaceflight-induced%20loss%20of%20male%20mouse%20quadriceps%20muscle&author=N.%20Chakraborty&author=D.L.%20Waning&author=A.%20Gautam&author=A.%20Hoke&author=B.%20Sowe&volume=35&publication_year=2020&pages=2049-2057&pmid=32511780&doi=10.1002/jbmr.4102&)]
  * 28.Ohnishi T., Inoue N., Matsumoto H., Omatsu T., Ohira Y., Nagaoka S. Cellular content of p53 protein in rat skin after exposure to the space environment. J. Appl. Physiol. 1996;81:183–185. doi: 10.1152/jappl.1996.81.1.183. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/jappl.1996.81.1.183)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8828662/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Appl.%20Physiol.&title=Cellular%20content%20of%20p53%20protein%20in%20rat%20skin%20after%20exposure%20to%20the%20space%20environment&author=T.%20Ohnishi&author=N.%20Inoue&author=H.%20Matsumoto&author=T.%20Omatsu&author=Y.%20Ohira&volume=81&publication_year=1996&pages=183-185&pmid=8828662&doi=10.1152/jappl.1996.81.1.183&)]
  * 29.Lu T., Zhang Y., Kidane Y., Feiveson A., Stodieck L., Karouia F., Ramesh G., Rohde L., Wu H. Cellular responses and gene expression profile changes due to bleomycin-induced DNA damage in human fibroblasts in space. PLoS ONE. 2017;12:e0170358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170358. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0170358)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC5332164/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28248986/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20ONE&title=Cellular%20responses%20and%20gene%20expression%20profile%20changes%20due%20to%20bleomycin-induced%20DNA%20damage%20in%20human%20fibroblasts%20in%20space&author=T.%20Lu&author=Y.%20Zhang&author=Y.%20Kidane&author=A.%20Feiveson&author=L.%20Stodieck&volume=12&publication_year=2017&pages=e0170358&pmid=28248986&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0170358&)]
  * 30.Blaber E.A., Dvorochkin N., Lee C., Alwood J.S., Yousuf R., Pianetta P., Globus R.K., Burns B.P., Almeida E.A. Microgravity induces pelvic bone loss through osteoclastic activity, osteocytic osteolysis, and osteoblastic cell cycle inhibition by CDKN1a/p21. PLoS ONE. 2013;8:e61372. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061372. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0061372)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC3630201/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23637819/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20ONE&title=Microgravity%20induces%20pelvic%20bone%20loss%20through%20osteoclastic%20activity,%20osteocytic%20osteolysis,%20and%20osteoblastic%20cell%20cycle%20inhibition%20by%20CDKN1a/p21&author=E.A.%20Blaber&author=N.%20Dvorochkin&author=C.%20Lee&author=J.S.%20Alwood&author=R.%20Yousuf&volume=8&publication_year=2013&pages=e61372&pmid=23637819&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0061372&)]
  * 31.Hammond T.G., Allen P.L., Birdsall H.H. Effects of space flight on mouse liver versus kidney: Gene pathway analyses. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018;19:4106. doi: 10.3390/ijms19124106. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms19124106)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC6321533/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30567358/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Mol.%20Sci.&title=Effects%20of%20space%20flight%20on%20mouse%20liver%20versus%20kidney:%20Gene%20pathway%20analyses&author=T.G.%20Hammond&author=P.L.%20Allen&author=H.H.%20Birdsall&volume=19&publication_year=2018&pages=4106&pmid=30567358&doi=10.3390/ijms19124106&)]
  * 32.Behnke B.J., Stabley J.N., McCullough D.J., Davis R.T., 3rd, Dominguez J.M., 2nd, Muller-Delp J.M., Delp M.D. Effects of spaceflight and ground recovery on mesenteric artery and vein constrictor properties in mice. FASEB J. 2013;27:399–409. doi: 10.1096/fj.12-218503. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.12-218503)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC4050424/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23099650/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=FASEB%20J.&title=Effects%20of%20spaceflight%20and%20ground%20recovery%20on%20mesenteric%20artery%20and%20vein%20constrictor%20properties%20in%20mice&author=B.J.%20Behnke&author=J.N.%20Stabley&author=D.J.%20McCullough&author=R.T.%20Davis&author=J.M.%20Dominguez&volume=27&publication_year=2013&pages=399-409&pmid=23099650&doi=10.1096/fj.12-218503&)]
  * 33.Bailey J.F., Hargens A.R., Cheng K.K., Lotz J.C. Effect of microgravity on the biomechanical properties of lumbar and caudal intervertebral discs in mice. J. Biomech. 2014;47:2983–2988. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2014.07.005. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2014.07.005)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25085756/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biomech.&title=Effect%20of%20microgravity%20on%20the%20biomechanical%20properties%20of%20lumbar%20and%20caudal%20intervertebral%20discs%20in%20mice&author=J.F.%20Bailey&author=A.R.%20Hargens&author=K.K.%20Cheng&author=J.C.%20Lotz&volume=47&publication_year=2014&pages=2983-2988&pmid=25085756&doi=10.1016/j.jbiomech.2014.07.005&)]
  * 34.Connor M.K., Hood D.A. Effect of microgravity on the expression of mitochondrial enzymes in rat cardiac and skeletal muscles. J. Appl. Physiol. 1998;84:593–598. doi: 10.1152/jappl.1998.84.2.593. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/jappl.1998.84.2.593)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9475870/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Appl.%20Physiol.&title=Effect%20of%20microgravity%20on%20the%20expression%20of%20mitochondrial%20enzymes%20in%20rat%20cardiac%20and%20skeletal%20muscles&author=M.K.%20Connor&author=D.A.%20Hood&volume=84&publication_year=1998&pages=593-598&pmid=9475870&doi=10.1152/jappl.1998.84.2.593&)]
  * 35.Ogneva I.V., Loktev S.S., Sychev V.N. Cytoskeleton structure and total methylation of mouse cardiac and lung tissue during space flight. PLoS ONE. 2018;13:e0192643. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0192643. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0192643)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC5955502/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29768411/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20ONE&title=Cytoskeleton%20structure%20and%20total%20methylation%20of%20mouse%20cardiac%20and%20lung%20tissue%20during%20space%20flight&author=I.V.%20Ogneva&author=S.S.%20Loktev&author=V.N.%20Sychev&volume=13&publication_year=2018&pages=e0192643&pmid=29768411&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0192643&)]
  * 36.Walls S., Diop S., Birse R., Elmen L., Gan Z., Kalvakuri S., Pineda S., Reddy C., Taylor E., Trinh B., et al. Prolonged exposure to microgravity reduces cardiac contractility and initiates remodeling in Drosophila. Cell Rep. 2020;33:108445. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108445. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108445)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC7787258/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33242407/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Rep.&title=Prolonged%20exposure%20to%20microgravity%20reduces%20cardiac%20contractility%20and%20initiates%20remodeling%20in%20Drosophila&author=S.%20Walls&author=S.%20Diop&author=R.%20Birse&author=L.%20Elmen&author=Z.%20Gan&volume=33&publication_year=2020&pages=108445&pmid=33242407&doi=10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108445&)]
  * 37.Camberos V., Baio J., Mandujano A., Martinez A.F., Bailey L., Hasaniya N., Kearns-Jonker M. The impact of spaceflight and microgravity on the human islet-1+ cardiovascular progenitor cell transcriptome. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021;22:3577. doi: 10.3390/ijms22073577. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22073577)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC8036947/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33808224/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Mol.%20Sci.&title=The%20impact%20of%20spaceflight%20and%20microgravity%20on%20the%20human%20islet-1+%20cardiovascular%20progenitor%20cell%20transcriptome&author=V.%20Camberos&author=J.%20Baio&author=A.%20Mandujano&author=A.F.%20Martinez&author=L.%20Bailey&volume=22&publication_year=2021&pages=3577&pmid=33808224&doi=10.3390/ijms22073577&)]
  * 38.Blaber E.A., Pecaut M.J., Jonscher K.R. Spaceflight activates autophagy programs and the proteasome in mouse liver. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017;18:2062. doi: 10.3390/ijms18102062. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms18102062)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC5666744/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28953266/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Mol.%20Sci.&title=Spaceflight%20activates%20autophagy%20programs%20and%20the%20proteasome%20in%20mouse%20liver&author=E.A.%20Blaber&author=M.J.%20Pecaut&author=K.R.%20Jonscher&volume=18&publication_year=2017&pages=2062&pmid=28953266&doi=10.3390/ijms18102062&)]
  * 39.Suzuki T., Uruno A., Yumoto A., Taguchi K., Suzuki M., Harada N., Ryoke R., Naganuma E., Osanai N., Goto A., et al. Nrf2 contributes to the weight gain of mice during space travel. Commun. Biol. 2020;3:496. doi: 10.1038/s42003-020-01227-2. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-020-01227-2)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC7479603/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32901092/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Commun.%20Biol.&title=Nrf2%20contributes%20to%20the%20weight%20gain%20of%20mice%20during%20space%20travel&author=T.%20Suzuki&author=A.%20Uruno&author=A.%20Yumoto&author=K.%20Taguchi&author=M.%20Suzuki&volume=3&publication_year=2020&pages=496&pmid=32901092&doi=10.1038/s42003-020-01227-2&)]
  * 40.Hayashi T., Kudo T., Fujita R., Fujita S.I., Tsubouchi H., Fuseya S., Suzuki R., Hamada M., Okada R., Muratani M., et al. Nuclear factor E2-related factor 2 (NRF2) deficiency accelerates fast fibre type transition in soleus muscle during space flight. Commun. Biol. 2021;4:787. doi: 10.1038/s42003-021-02334-4. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-02334-4)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC8225765/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34168270/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Commun.%20Biol.&title=Nuclear%20factor%20E2-related%20factor%202%20\(NRF2\)%20deficiency%20accelerates%20fast%20fibre%20type%20transition%20in%20soleus%20muscle%20during%20space%20flight&author=T.%20Hayashi&author=T.%20Kudo&author=R.%20Fujita&author=S.I.%20Fujita&author=H.%20Tsubouchi&volume=4&publication_year=2021&pages=787&pmid=34168270&doi=10.1038/s42003-021-02334-4&)]
  * 41.Lambeth J.D., Neish A.S. Nox enzymes and new thinking on reactive oxygen: A double-edged sword revisited. Annu. Rev. Pathol. 2014;9:119–145. doi: 10.1146/annurev-pathol-012513-104651. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-pathol-012513-104651)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24050626/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Annu.%20Rev.%20Pathol.&title=Nox%20enzymes%20and%20new%20thinking%20on%20reactive%20oxygen:%20A%20double-edged%20sword%20revisited&author=J.D.%20Lambeth&author=A.S.%20Neish&volume=9&publication_year=2014&pages=119-145&pmid=24050626&doi=10.1146/annurev-pathol-012513-104651&)]
  * 42.Bedard K., Krause K.H. The NOX family of ROS-generating NADPH oxidases: Physiology and pathophysiology. Physiol. Rev. 2007;87:245–313. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00044.2005. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00044.2005)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17237347/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Physiol.%20Rev.&title=The%20NOX%20family%20of%20ROS-generating%20NADPH%20oxidases:%20Physiology%20and%20pathophysiology&author=K.%20Bedard&author=K.H.%20Krause&volume=87&publication_year=2007&pages=245-313&pmid=17237347&doi=10.1152/physrev.00044.2005&)]
  * 43.Brandes R.P., Weissmann N., Schroder K. NADPH oxidases in cardiovascular disease. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2010;49:687–706. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2010.04.030. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2010.04.030)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20444433/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Free%20Radic.%20Biol.%20Med.&title=NADPH%20oxidases%20in%20cardiovascular%20disease&author=R.P.%20Brandes&author=N.%20Weissmann&author=K.%20Schroder&volume=49&publication_year=2010&pages=687-706&pmid=20444433&doi=10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2010.04.030&)]
  * 44.Liang L., Yuan W., Qu L., Li H., Zhang L., Fan G.C., Peng T. Administration of losartan preserves cardiomyocyte size and prevents myocardial dysfunction in tail-suspended mice by inhibiting p47(phox) phosphorylation, NADPH oxidase activation and MuRF1 expression. J. Transl. Med. 2019;17:279. doi: 10.1186/s12967-019-2021-1. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-019-2021-1)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC6704685/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31438970/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Transl.%20Med.&title=Administration%20of%20losartan%20preserves%20cardiomyocyte%20size%20and%20prevents%20myocardial%20dysfunction%20in%20tail-suspended%20mice%20by%20inhibiting%20p47\(phox\)%20phosphorylation,%20NADPH%20oxidase%20activation%20and%20MuRF1%20expression&author=L.%20Liang&author=W.%20Yuan&author=L.%20Qu&author=H.%20Li&author=L.%20Zhang&volume=17&publication_year=2019&pages=279&pmid=31438970&doi=10.1186/s12967-019-2021-1&)]
  * 45.Wang D., Patel V.V., Ricciotti E., Zhou R., Levin M.D., Gao E., Yu Z., Ferrari V.A., Lu M.M., Xu J., et al. Cardiomyocyte cyclooxygenase-2 influences cardiac rhythm and function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2009;106:7548–7552. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0805806106. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0805806106)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC2670242/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19376970/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc.%20Natl.%20Acad.%20Sci.%20USA&title=Cardiomyocyte%20cyclooxygenase-2%20influences%20cardiac%20rhythm%20and%20function&author=D.%20Wang&author=V.V.%20Patel&author=E.%20Ricciotti&author=R.%20Zhou&author=M.D.%20Levin&volume=106&publication_year=2009&pages=7548-7552&pmid=19376970&doi=10.1073/pnas.0805806106&)]
  * 46.Sellers R.S., Radi Z.A., Khan N.K. Pathophysiology of cyclooxygenases in cardiovascular homeostasis. Vet. Pathol. 2010;47:601–613. doi: 10.1177/0300985810364389. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1177/0300985810364389)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20418470/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Vet.%20Pathol.&title=Pathophysiology%20of%20cyclooxygenases%20in%20cardiovascular%20homeostasis&author=R.S.%20Sellers&author=Z.A.%20Radi&author=N.K.%20Khan&volume=47&publication_year=2010&pages=601-613&pmid=20418470&doi=10.1177/0300985810364389&)]
  * 47.Hughes-Fulford M., Rodenacker K., Jutting U. Reduction of anabolic signals and alteration of osteoblast nuclear morphology in microgravity. J. Cell. Biochem. 2006;99:435–449. doi: 10.1002/jcb.20883. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcb.20883)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16619267/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Cell.%20Biochem.&title=Reduction%20of%20anabolic%20signals%20and%20alteration%20of%20osteoblast%20nuclear%20morphology%20in%20microgravity&author=M.%20Hughes-Fulford&author=K.%20Rodenacker&author=U.%20Jutting&volume=99&publication_year=2006&pages=435-449&pmid=16619267&doi=10.1002/jcb.20883&)]
  * 48.Bondesen B.A., Mills S.T., Pavlath G.K. The COX-2 pathway regulates growth of atrophied muscle via multiple mechanisms. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 2006;290:C1651–C1659. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00518.2005. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00518.2005)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16467402/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Physiol.%20Cell%20Physiol.&title=The%20COX-2%20pathway%20regulates%20growth%20of%20atrophied%20muscle%20via%20multiple%20mechanisms&author=B.A.%20Bondesen&author=S.T.%20Mills&author=G.K.%20Pavlath&volume=290&publication_year=2006&pages=C1651-C1659&pmid=16467402&doi=10.1152/ajpcell.00518.2005&)]
  * 49.Nakai K., Tanaka S., Sakai A., Nagashima M., Tanaka M., Otomo H., Nakamura T. Cyclooxygenase-2 selective inhibition suppresses restoration of tibial trabecular bone formation in association with restriction of osteoblast maturation in skeletal reloading after hindlimb elevation of mice. Bone. 2006;39:83–92. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2005.12.014. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2005.12.014)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16487758/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone&title=Cyclooxygenase-2%20selective%20inhibition%20suppresses%20restoration%20of%20tibial%20trabecular%20bone%20formation%20in%20association%20with%20restriction%20of%20osteoblast%20maturation%20in%20skeletal%20reloading%20after%20hindlimb%20elevation%20of%20mice&author=K.%20Nakai&author=S.%20Tanaka&author=A.%20Sakai&author=M.%20Nagashima&author=M.%20Tanaka&volume=39&publication_year=2006&pages=83-92&pmid=16487758&doi=10.1016/j.bone.2005.12.014&)]
  * 50.Nishiyama A., Matsui M., Iwata S., Hirota K., Masutani H., Nakamura H., Takagi Y., Sono H., Gon Y., Yodoi J. Identification of thioredoxin-binding protein-2/vitamin D(3) up-regulated protein 1 as a negative regulator of thioredoxin function and expression. J. Biol. Chem. 1999;274:21645–21650. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.31.21645. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.31.21645)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10419473/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biol.%20Chem.&title=Identification%20of%20thioredoxin-binding%20protein-2/vitamin%20D\(3\)%20up-regulated%20protein%201%20as%20a%20negative%20regulator%20of%20thioredoxin%20function%20and%20expression&author=A.%20Nishiyama&author=M.%20Matsui&author=S.%20Iwata&author=K.%20Hirota&author=H.%20Masutani&volume=274&publication_year=1999&pages=21645-21650&pmid=10419473&doi=10.1074/jbc.274.31.21645&)]
  * 51.Versari S., Longinotti G., Barenghi L., Maier J.A., Bradamante S. The challenging environment on board the International Space Station affects endothelial cell function by triggering oxidative stress through thioredoxin interacting protein overexpression: The ESA-SPHINX experiment. FASEB J. 2013;27:4466–4475. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-229195. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.13-229195)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23913861/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=FASEB%20J.&title=The%20challenging%20environment%20on%20board%20the%20International%20Space%20Station%20affects%20endothelial%20cell%20function%20by%20triggering%20oxidative%20stress%20through%20thioredoxin%20interacting%20protein%20overexpression:%20The%20ESA-SPHINX%20experiment&author=S.%20Versari&author=G.%20Longinotti&author=L.%20Barenghi&author=J.A.%20Maier&author=S.%20Bradamante&volume=27&publication_year=2013&pages=4466-4475&pmid=23913861&doi=10.1096/fj.13-229195&)]
  * 52.Saadatzadeh M.R., Bijangi-Vishehsaraei K., Hong P., Bergmann H., Haneline L.S. Oxidant hypersensitivity of Fanconi anemia type C-deficient cells is dependent on a redox-regulated apoptotic pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 2004;279:16805–16812. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M313721200. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M313721200)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14764578/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biol.%20Chem.&title=Oxidant%20hypersensitivity%20of%20Fanconi%20anemia%20type%20C-deficient%20cells%20is%20dependent%20on%20a%20redox-regulated%20apoptotic%20pathway&author=M.R.%20Saadatzadeh&author=K.%20Bijangi-Vishehsaraei&author=P.%20Hong&author=H.%20Bergmann&author=L.S.%20Haneline&volume=279&publication_year=2004&pages=16805-16812&pmid=14764578&doi=10.1074/jbc.M313721200&)]
  * 53.Galow A.M., Wolfien M., Muller P., Bartsch M., Brunner R.M., Hoeflich A., Wolkenhauer O., David R., Goldammer T. Integrative cluster analysis of whole hearts reveals proliferative cardiomyocytes in adult mice. Cells. 2020;9:1144. doi: 10.3390/cells9051144. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells9051144)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC7291011/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32384695/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cells&title=Integrative%20cluster%20analysis%20of%20whole%20hearts%20reveals%20proliferative%20cardiomyocytes%20in%20adult%20mice&author=A.M.%20Galow&author=M.%20Wolfien&author=P.%20Muller&author=M.%20Bartsch&author=R.M.%20Brunner&volume=9&publication_year=2020&pages=1144&pmid=32384695&doi=10.3390/cells9051144&)]
  * 54.Tong Y.F., Wang Y., Ding Y.Y., Li J.M., Pan X.C., Lu X.L., Chen X.H., Liu Y., Zhang H.G. Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p21WAF1/CIP1 facilitates the development of cardiac hypertrophy. Cell Physiol. Biochem. 2017;42:1645–1656. doi: 10.1159/000479407. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1159/000479407)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28746924/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Physiol.%20Biochem.&title=Cyclin-Dependent%20Kinase%20Inhibitor%20p21WAF1/CIP1%20facilitates%20the%20development%20of%20cardiac%20hypertrophy&author=Y.F.%20Tong&author=Y.%20Wang&author=Y.Y.%20Ding&author=J.M.%20Li&author=X.C.%20Pan&volume=42&publication_year=2017&pages=1645-1656&pmid=28746924&doi=10.1159/000479407&)]
  * 55.Xu M., Wan C.X., Huang S.H., Wang H.B., Fan D., Wu H.M., Wu Q.Q., Ma Z.G., Deng W., Tang Q.Z. Oridonin protects against cardiac hypertrophy by promoting P21-related autophagy. Cell Death Dis. 2019;10:403. doi: 10.1038/s41419-019-1617-y. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-019-1617-y)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC6534559/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31127082/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Death%20Dis.&title=Oridonin%20protects%20against%20cardiac%20hypertrophy%20by%20promoting%20P21-related%20autophagy&author=M.%20Xu&author=C.X.%20Wan&author=S.H.%20Huang&author=H.B.%20Wang&author=D.%20Fan&volume=10&publication_year=2019&pages=403&pmid=31127082&doi=10.1038/s41419-019-1617-y&)]
  * 56.Huang S., Xu M., Liu L., Yang J., Wang H., Wan C., Deng W., Tang Q. Autophagy is involved in the protective effect of p21 on LPS-induced cardiac dysfunction. Cell Death Dis. 2020;11:554. doi: 10.1038/s41419-020-02765-7. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-020-02765-7)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC7374585/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32694519/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Death%20Dis.&title=Autophagy%20is%20involved%20in%20the%20protective%20effect%20of%20p21%20on%20LPS-induced%20cardiac%20dysfunction&author=S.%20Huang&author=M.%20Xu&author=L.%20Liu&author=J.%20Yang&author=H.%20Wang&volume=11&publication_year=2020&pages=554&pmid=32694519&doi=10.1038/s41419-020-02765-7&)]
  * 57.Hauck L., Grothe D., Billia F. p21(CIP1/WAF1)-dependent inhibition of cardiac hypertrophy in response to Angiotensin II involves Akt/Myc and pRb signaling. Peptides. 2016;83:38–48. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2016.07.003. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.peptides.2016.07.003)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27486069/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Peptides&title=p21\(CIP1/WAF1\)-dependent%20inhibition%20of%20cardiac%20hypertrophy%20in%20response%20to%20Angiotensin%20II%20involves%20Akt/Myc%20and%20pRb%20signaling&author=L.%20Hauck&author=D.%20Grothe&author=F.%20Billia&volume=83&publication_year=2016&pages=38-48&pmid=27486069&doi=10.1016/j.peptides.2016.07.003&)]
  * 58.Burton P.B., Yacoub M.H., Barton P.J. Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor expression in human heart failure. A comparison with fetal development. Eur. Heart J. 1999;20:604–611. doi: 10.1053/euhj.1998.1231. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1053/euhj.1998.1231)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10337545/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur.%20Heart%20J.&title=Cyclin-dependent%20kinase%20inhibitor%20expression%20in%20human%20heart%20failure.%20A%20comparison%20with%20fetal%20development&author=P.B.%20Burton&author=M.H.%20Yacoub&author=P.J.%20Barton&volume=20&publication_year=1999&pages=604-611&pmid=10337545&doi=10.1053/euhj.1998.1231&)]
  * 59.Pei L., Melmed S. Isolation and characterization of a pituitary tumor-transforming gene (PTTG) Mol. Endocrinol. 1997;11:433–441. doi: 10.1210/mend.11.4.9911. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1210/mend.11.4.9911)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9092795/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Endocrinol.&title=Isolation%20and%20characterization%20of%20a%20pituitary%20tumor-transforming%20gene%20\(PTTG\)&author=L.%20Pei&author=S.%20Melmed&volume=11&publication_year=1997&pages=433-441&pmid=9092795&doi=10.1210/mend.11.4.9911&)]
  * 60.Hoglund A., Stromvall K., Li Y., Forshell L.P., Nilsson J.A. Chk2 deficiency in Myc overexpressing lymphoma cells elicits a synergistic lethal response in combination with PARP inhibition. Cell Cycle. 2011;10:3598–3607. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.20.17887. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.4161/cc.10.20.17887)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC3266184/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22030621/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Cycle&title=Chk2%20deficiency%20in%20Myc%20overexpressing%20lymphoma%20cells%20elicits%20a%20synergistic%20lethal%20response%20in%20combination%20with%20PARP%20inhibition&author=A.%20Hoglund&author=K.%20Stromvall&author=Y.%20Li&author=L.P.%20Forshell&author=J.A.%20Nilsson&volume=10&publication_year=2011&pages=3598-3607&pmid=22030621&doi=10.4161/cc.10.20.17887&)]
  * 61.Seawright J.W., Sridharan V., Landes R.D., Cao M., Singh P., Koturbash I., Mao X.W., Miousse I.R., Singh S.P., Nelson G.A., et al. Effects of low-dose oxygen ions and protons on cardiac function and structure in male C57BL/6J mice. Life Sci. Space Res. 2019;20:72–84. doi: 10.1016/j.lssr.2019.01.003. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lssr.2019.01.003)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC6391741/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30797436/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Life%20Sci.%20Space%20Res.&title=Effects%20of%20low-dose%20oxygen%20ions%20and%20protons%20on%20cardiac%20function%20and%20structure%20in%20male%20C57BL/6J%20mice&author=J.W.%20Seawright&author=V.%20Sridharan&author=R.D.%20Landes&author=M.%20Cao&author=P.%20Singh&volume=20&publication_year=2019&pages=72-84&pmid=30797436&doi=10.1016/j.lssr.2019.01.003&)]
  * 62.Prasad B., Grimm D., Strauch S.M., Erzinger G.S., Corydon T.J., Lebert M., Magnusson N.E., Infanger M., Richter P., Kruger M. Influence of microgravity on apoptosis in cells, tissues, and other systems in vivo and in vitro. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020;21:9373. doi: 10.3390/ijms21249373. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21249373)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC7764784/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33317046/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Mol.%20Sci.&title=Influence%20of%20microgravity%20on%20apoptosis%20in%20cells,%20tissues,%20and%20other%20systems%20in%20vivo%20and%20in%20vitro&author=B.%20Prasad&author=D.%20Grimm&author=S.M.%20Strauch&author=G.S.%20Erzinger&author=T.J.%20Corydon&volume=21&publication_year=2020&pages=9373&pmid=33317046&doi=10.3390/ijms21249373&)]
  * 63.Congdon C.C., Allebban Z., Gibson L.A., Kaplansky A., Strickland K.M., Jago T.L., Johnson D.L., Lange R.D., Ichiki A.T. Lymphatic tissue changes in rats flown on Spacelab Life Sciences-2. J. Appl. Physiol. 1996;81:172–177. doi: 10.1152/jappl.1996.81.1.172. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/jappl.1996.81.1.172)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8828660/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Appl.%20Physiol.&title=Lymphatic%20tissue%20changes%20in%20rats%20flown%20on%20Spacelab%20Life%20Sciences-2&author=C.C.%20Congdon&author=Z.%20Allebban&author=L.A.%20Gibson&author=A.%20Kaplansky&author=K.M.%20Strickland&volume=81&publication_year=1996&pages=172-177&pmid=8828660&doi=10.1152/jappl.1996.81.1.172&)]
  * 64.Gridley D.S., Mao X.W., Stodieck L.S., Ferguson V.L., Bateman T.A., Moldovan M., Cunningham C.E., Jones T.A., Slater J.M., Pecaut M.J. Changes in mouse thymus and spleen after return from the STS-135 mission in space. PLoS ONE. 2013;8:e75097. doi: 10.1371/annotation/e66bdc4e-2409-4582-b163-7bc182db275e. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/annotation/e66bdc4e-2409-4582-b163-7bc182db275e)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC3777930/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24069384/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20ONE&title=Changes%20in%20mouse%20thymus%20and%20spleen%20after%20return%20from%20the%20STS-135%20mission%20in%20space&author=D.S.%20Gridley&author=X.W.%20Mao&author=L.S.%20Stodieck&author=V.L.%20Ferguson&author=T.A.%20Bateman&volume=8&publication_year=2013&pages=e75097&pmid=24069384&doi=10.1371/annotation/e66bdc4e-2409-4582-b163-7bc182db275e&)]
  * 65.Locksley R.M., Killeen N., Lenardo M.J. The TNF and TNF receptor superfamilies: Integrating mammalian biology. Cell. 2001;104:487–501. doi: 10.1016/S0092-8674(01)00237-9. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674\(01\)00237-9)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11239407/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell&title=The%20TNF%20and%20TNF%20receptor%20superfamilies:%20Integrating%20mammalian%20biology&author=R.M.%20Locksley&author=N.%20Killeen&author=M.J.%20Lenardo&volume=104&publication_year=2001&pages=487-501&pmid=11239407&doi=10.1016/S0092-8674\(01\)00237-9&)]
  * 66.Gridley D.S., Slater J.M., Luo-Owen X., Rizvi A., Chapes S.K., Stodieck L.S., Ferguson V.L., Pecaut M.J. Spaceflight effects on T lymphocyte distribution, function and gene expression. J. Appl. Physiol. 2009;106:194–202. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.91126.2008. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.91126.2008)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC2636934/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18988762/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Appl.%20Physiol.&title=Spaceflight%20effects%20on%20T%20lymphocyte%20distribution,%20function%20and%20gene%20expression&author=D.S.%20Gridley&author=J.M.%20Slater&author=X.%20Luo-Owen&author=A.%20Rizvi&author=S.K.%20Chapes&volume=106&publication_year=2009&pages=194-202&pmid=18988762&doi=10.1152/japplphysiol.91126.2008&)]
  * 67.Crucian B., Stowe R.P., Mehta S., Quiriarte H., Pierson D., Sams C. Alterations in adaptive immunity persist during long-duration spaceflight. NPJ Microgravity. 2015;1:15013. doi: 10.1038/npjmgrav.2015.13. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/npjmgrav.2015.13)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC5515498/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28725716/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=NPJ%20Microgravity&title=Alterations%20in%20adaptive%20immunity%20persist%20during%20long-duration%20spaceflight&author=B.%20Crucian&author=R.P.%20Stowe&author=S.%20Mehta&author=H.%20Quiriarte&author=D.%20Pierson&volume=1&publication_year=2015&pages=15013&pmid=28725716&doi=10.1038/npjmgrav.2015.13&)]
  * 68.Chang T.T., Walther I., Li C.F., Boonyaratanakornkit J., Galleri G., Meloni M.A., Pippia P., Cogoli A., Hughes-Fulford M. The Rel/NF-kappaB pathway and transcription of immediate early genes in T cell activation are inhibited by microgravity. J. Leukoc. Biol. 2012;92:1133–1145. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0312157. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1189/jlb.0312157)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC3501893/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22750545/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Leukoc.%20Biol.&title=The%20Rel/NF-kappaB%20pathway%20and%20transcription%20of%20immediate%20early%20genes%20in%20T%20cell%20activation%20are%20inhibited%20by%20microgravity&author=T.T.%20Chang&author=I.%20Walther&author=C.F.%20Li&author=J.%20Boonyaratanakornkit&author=G.%20Galleri&volume=92&publication_year=2012&pages=1133-1145&pmid=22750545&doi=10.1189/jlb.0312157&)]
  * 69.Gertz M.L., Chin C.R., Tomoiaga D., MacKay M., Chang C., Butler D., Afshinnekoo E., Bezdan D., Schmidt M.A., Mozsary C., et al. Multi-omic, single-cell, and biochemical profiles of astronauts guide Pharmacological strategies for returning to gravity. Cell Rep. 2020;33:108429. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108429. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108429)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC9444344/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33242408/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Rep.&title=Multi-omic,%20single-cell,%20and%20biochemical%20profiles%20of%20astronauts%20guide%20Pharmacological%20strategies%20for%20returning%20to%20gravity&author=M.L.%20Gertz&author=C.R.%20Chin&author=D.%20Tomoiaga&author=M.%20MacKay&author=C.%20Chang&volume=33&publication_year=2020&pages=108429&pmid=33242408&doi=10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108429&)]
  * 70.Sasi S.P., Yan X., Zuriaga-Herrero M., Gee H., Lee J., Mehrzad R., Song J., Onufrak J., Morgan J., Enderling H., et al. Different sequences of fractionated low-dose proton and single iron-radiation-induced divergent biological responses in the heart. Radiat. Res. 2017;188:191–203. doi: 10.1667/RR14667.1. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR14667.1)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC6555403/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28613990/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res.&title=Different%20sequences%20of%20fractionated%20low-dose%20proton%20and%20single%20iron-radiation-induced%20divergent%20biological%20responses%20in%20the%20heart&author=S.P.%20Sasi&author=X.%20Yan&author=M.%20Zuriaga-Herrero&author=H.%20Gee&author=J.%20Lee&volume=188&publication_year=2017&pages=191-203&pmid=28613990&doi=10.1667/RR14667.1&)]
  * 71.Garikipati V.N.S., Arakelyan A., Blakely E.A., Chang P.Y., Truongcao M.M., Cimini M., Malaredy V., Bajpai A., Addya S., Bisserier M., et al. Long-term effects of very low dose particle radiation on gene expression in the heart: Degenerative disease risks. Cells. 2021;10:387. doi: 10.3390/cells10020387. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells10020387)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC7917872/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33668521/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cells&title=Long-term%20effects%20of%20very%20low%20dose%20particle%20radiation%20on%20gene%20expression%20in%20the%20heart:%20Degenerative%20disease%20risks&author=V.N.S.%20Garikipati&author=A.%20Arakelyan&author=E.A.%20Blakely&author=P.Y.%20Chang&author=M.M.%20Truongcao&volume=10&publication_year=2021&pages=387&pmid=33668521&doi=10.3390/cells10020387&)]
  * 72.Hughson R.L., Robertson A.D., Arbeille P., Shoemaker J.K., Rush J.W., Fraser K.S., Greaves D.K. Increased postflight carotid artery stiffness and inflight insulin resistance resulting from 6-mo spaceflight in male and female astronauts. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 2016;310:H628–H638. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00802.2015. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00802.2015)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26747504/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Physiol.%20Heart%20Circ.%20Physiol.&title=Increased%20postflight%20carotid%20artery%20stiffness%20and%20inflight%20insulin%20resistance%20resulting%20from%206-mo%20spaceflight%20in%20male%20and%20female%20astronauts&author=R.L.%20Hughson&author=A.D.%20Robertson&author=P.%20Arbeille&author=J.K.%20Shoemaker&author=J.W.%20Rush&volume=310&publication_year=2016&pages=H628-H638&pmid=26747504&doi=10.1152/ajpheart.00802.2015&)]
  * 73.Mehta S.K., Laudenslager M.L., Stowe R.P., Crucian B.E., Feiveson A.H., Sams C.F., Pierson D.L. Latent virus reactivation in astronauts on the international space station. NPJ Microgravity. 2017;3:11. doi: 10.1038/s41526-017-0015-y. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-017-0015-y)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC5445581/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28649633/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=NPJ%20Microgravity&title=Latent%20virus%20reactivation%20in%20astronauts%20on%20the%20international%20space%20station&author=S.K.%20Mehta&author=M.L.%20Laudenslager&author=R.P.%20Stowe&author=B.E.%20Crucian&author=A.H.%20Feiveson&volume=3&publication_year=2017&pages=11&pmid=28649633&doi=10.1038/s41526-017-0015-y&)]
  * 74.Roberts D.R., Inglesby D.C., Brown T.R., Collins H.R., Eckert M.A., Asemani D. Longitudinal change in ventricular volume is accelerated in astronauts undergoing long-duration spaceflight. Aging Brain. 2021;1:100017. doi: 10.1016/j.nbas.2021.100017. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbas.2021.100017)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC9997154/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36911514/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Aging%20Brain&title=Longitudinal%20change%20in%20ventricular%20volume%20is%20accelerated%20in%20astronauts%20undergoing%20long-duration%20spaceflight&author=D.R.%20Roberts&author=D.C.%20Inglesby&author=T.R.%20Brown&author=H.R.%20Collins&author=M.A.%20Eckert&volume=1&publication_year=2021&pages=100017&pmid=36911514&doi=10.1016/j.nbas.2021.100017&)]
  * 75.Szklarczyk D., Gable A.L., Nastou K.C., Lyon D., Kirsch R., Pyysalo S., Doncheva N.T., Legeay M., Fang T., Bork P., et al. The STRING database in 2021: Customizable protein-protein networks, and functional characterization of user-uploaded gene/measurement sets. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021;49:D605–D612. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1074. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa1074)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC7779004/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33237311/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=The%20STRING%20database%20in%202021:%20Customizable%20protein-protein%20networks,%20and%20functional%20characterization%20of%20user-uploaded%20gene/measurement%20sets&author=D.%20Szklarczyk&author=A.L.%20Gable&author=K.C.%20Nastou&author=D.%20Lyon&author=R.%20Kirsch&volume=49&publication_year=2021&pages=D605-D612&pmid=33237311&doi=10.1093/nar/gkaa1074&)]
  * 76.Chen J., Bardes E.E., Aronow B.J., Jegga A.G. ToppGene Suite for gene list enrichment analysis and candidate gene prioritization. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009;37:W305–W311. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp427. [[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkp427)] [[PMC free article](/articles/PMC2703978/)] [[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19465376/)] [[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=ToppGene%20Suite%20for%20gene%20list%20enrichment%20analysis%20and%20candidate%20gene%20prioritization&author=J.%20Chen&author=E.E.%20Bardes&author=B.J.%20Aronow&author=A.G.%20Jegga&volume=37&publication_year=2009&pages=W305-W311&pmid=19465376&doi=10.1093/nar/gkp427&)]

## Associated Data

_This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or
supplementary materials included in this article._

### Supplementary Materials

[Click here for additional data
file.](/articles/instance/8396460/bin/ijms-22-09088-s001.zip) (96.2KB, zip)

### Data Availability Statement

All data associated with this study are provided in the main figures and
tables and in the supplementary information.

* * *

Articles from International Journal of Molecular Sciences are provided here
courtesy of **Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute (MDPI)**

